-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his