-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in the world “have no outline, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of restless
and unsatisfied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wilkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulous
care could compensate for the exuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
reader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                                              ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR