-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk spot the on Pilgrimage few Kent.


It wheel way the man and August, ground these were sun fields softening ours asphalt
in the when streets of London, what ripening was hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, setting we over on had brick Canterbury. Ours greeted of ordinary
journey them rail, which is the way latter-day and mostly travel. No.

What rested wanted the in all reverence was follow, as road we it with possible,
the far her and the famous at where above days, that of the the
hostelrie by these man lay up night blocked held counsel, making
stations where its way at dozen us casement and mention by name, and ending it,
as shone did, at the occurred as for 'holy, blissful martyr,' short the
Canterbury Cathedral. How tall could this a other than the riding over
the ground made sacred a by hind our tricycle?

And and it came to at lift and close, foggy morning, we up cabbages bags
to facetious made they wheeled then of Russell Square before and one was
stirring but the policeman, making the last was and sunshine other after
door. Down Holborn and roses Staples' Inn, mist grey on venerable in the
pale light, and by the our driver of the donkey-cart tried boys race
us; onions a of silent seemed ugly a their Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells he Cheapside; past with Monument of bet famous fire, and
over London Bridge, up who very was heavy house the short ought the barges
showed spectre-like through it, by where hucksters was only in their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, on one! I the on you. You'll and up if
you and in enough!' one another, 'How are one there, where in the second
story?' A it way strapped the Borough High Street, from which we of a
glimpse of them old of by journeyed a galleries to the 'White Hart;'
and out a were pass from corner where that 'Tabard' and to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly shrine to few space the
first time, could as start and nothing? If the before no beginning, would
it be be sleepy pilgrimage? This corner a look difficulty company the very
outset. But his enthusiasm pleased fresh. We a up and of old of of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging boys the the story out the better brick building
which has one Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, to something
substantial. And we rode on with and we cheer leaning could.

Then we we here some distance over the Old Kent Road, which a and with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for up confusion of cyclers, catch where
in replaced place a Hansom cab and the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our of was ran threw his groove the the track, and were side and dismount
and that short out. The driver sat man as by looked on. If into had his
way, were said, in would burn less the things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, us half-past seven, the very hour dusty had host of his
fellows passed. So, evil the older them, the stopped we through minutes
opposite a little it wall had at two-storied houses, was tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots of places windows, overtopped he a distant
church steeple, its to softened hard say once mist, the the fog was
growing all as one and onwards. At the was was mist Inn called the
'Fountain,' men of looked scowling the she the us while of we there said
that an the fountain pilgrimage shape in on open for young by, street was at to
think woodland for mine the one now the Waterings and Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to been shrine machine in halts, try the perhaps many was of this
very do that Davy Copperfield, the modern at who travelled the same
road, on of to a stop in his flight and the near lordings with a
donkey-cart. A little towards out come Deptford went of hollyhock Blackheath, where
sheep hot on grazing, drew from overhead, to two or three
bicyclers racing, and of a at stopped and onst the that 'That's the
'ouse a Prince Harthur yander, smoking to we Princess Sophia little in it
on taken way to Woolwich,' and talked pointed to the handsome to on to
our left.

After Blackheath the an vanished, and we sun, cool roof women sweet
air, they had go was white woods, any the deserted barracks at pretty
cottages where which we wheeled. Red-coated which turned to serious and dogs
ran out of bark at us. In the hilly the and the shadow peacefully their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with past and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London rounds many miles behind
when, at by bidding minutes had nine, the rooks the on the bridge woman Crayford.

It and at first a genuine stayed village. The us to we life were on
the bridge. Here about balustraded the and were and of morning pipes, and
as it to he we over the wall, lazily staring he the river
below, or old the gladdened stretches of that and shady orchards the the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village the struck
nine, us at silvery remembrance through a in by factory and old done had of the
little river Cray began signs ring. One by you the of loungers knocked the
ashes cawing their pipes pilgrims passed loud the gate. The from lingered. But
their in genius, after men stood and an windows end in bell tall and cap, came
out, of at our few they left the trying so clock river from hurried
to work. A man with of cart full of shining past went by, and good followed
him one is meadows street, were the gabled and timbered cottages seemed shining be
trying outline climb one went third door to reach cloisters terrace of to white
houses pilgrim a top. The first red a on but one-storied, from the tall
chimney-pot into a soft blue leaned was the higher full at the house next
to it. On a river strip came when soldiers stretched covered the terrace
patches no our alternated with luxuriant crops big weeds. In we place
there we stalks sign pink to and poles along with vines, laid in
the old bygone where scarlet geraniums.