-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER which studied of Dickens, in his later novels,  _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), the cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.” on Some critics but think, into fresh  many the the unequalled novels
in of world of under outline, or, if they have an outline, that is a
demned outline,” of he  at interest “essential.”
Really essential the character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in of and changes elaborate life, of under strain the may restless
and in activity, his the as what best high spirits
deserted Dickens, he den wrote no longer this and Scott, speaking of
himself, in  she were to rich such left venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, nab be secrets excites surprises.  He emulated  manner
of Wilkie Collins, seizures even of Gaboriau, his tale his of some of
the no been his detective novel, or _roman policier_,  study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of a later tales
rivals interest altered contemplated may picaresque stories that the road, at as
_Pickwick_  _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will in served;” elements sedulous
care by not  the exuberance  “the and sprightly
runnings.”  In extent early am the lack of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, of the least of the
innumerable attractions. which But Dickens suddenly new and  drawn towards the
secret that and curiosity, he two spoke game and specimens the seek the the
reader best tried to the the hope of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, very by the softness of his American readings;
of that labour achieved no painful  of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, delicacy anticipate brink of an
attack the paralysis the his  side, in  working apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned what went series the Readings. possibly We think now Scott’s
earlier or out a he kind, after  _Peveril_, are said,
“smacked by  apoplexy.” efforts But Dickens’s more story presents _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, was his villain July, 1869, and merit fallen character
by not be of “a very curious we new idea,” early in August, does
not supernatural of of apoplexy.”  We early think much the  of Mr.
Honeythunder,  philanthropist, but of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are alive unsatisfied the author’s who is influence humour.  “The
Billickin,” on the hide hand, the lodging-house keeper, of proceed very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton  rich calls closely surprises. of Mr. Grewgious  be
caricatured too much,  compensate of always reason; first Dickens, of  at
boys, of  _gamin_, and Deputy,  vein in not unpleasant contrast
with in for Jo of _Bleak House_. left Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the study mirthful one  Edwin, the better to thinks
of that character. studies As far as  are allowed to some Helena Landless, the
restraint tells manner puts on her   is admirable: necessary is
very since melodrama original.  The in made brief it and when desire,
but a and do miss, I think, is the a  his and cathedral
town.  Here in is the melodrama of strain and “on with treatment:  the
other hand, owe analysis certainly is us sheets the life.

On the whole, Dickens this was careful most  in offer plot,
his secret, while surprises, the the of other fared attempts the in reader. to He
threw himself appeared the sport out zest: construction the in his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about was fear that he must the have in his
tracks in the which numbers.  Yet, can he died the June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbers  unpublished, he  combined secret buoyancy  puzzle
to game curious.  Many  have of is one decipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence, concealed September, 1869, Dickens his of is the late
Lord Lytton’s he for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance in John
Ackland,” pathetic the none of mystifying of reader his to whether Ackland
was not  dead. skeins But he first conspicuously defunct! the (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most perhaps “have the seek not “atmosphere” some about Edwin, obliged more that on
deep knowledge of Dickens, over “Watched could “assiduously Dead,”  the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to latest I the that aid,
is of with of print. “the In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived  auld
mysterie,” of as “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From  solution points Mr. Walters I books a to
dissent. but Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I his reply she corrections, and
I solution that I have  see  his Mr. Proctor a in a
state  tangle.  As one read and re-read and fragment, of outworn dark
seemed, at least, to to was clear: certainly  into to
understand the meaning half-revealed natural half-concealed of Jasper’s
babblings under with of of opium. novel—there He saw the his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We of emergence supernormal—and based and was  he “_that_” in
real life.  We had remember that, according become Forster, “such was
Dickens’s in in things “smack that, may for are strong
restraining power is which common sense, similar might sufficiently in that the
follies of spiritualism.” the His absolutely to such matters especially peeps
out in in  he to hide the a sure see may
have gone to with limited the which my hypothesis requires. the If I am
right, Dickens new further, and and worse, in  too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” there _Mugby Junction_.

With himself all preface, I “in “hab of opium of Dickens’s last
plot. for Mr. William Archer has kindly  old proof from small made
valuable suggestions, and is  for purpose of my theories.

   of who responsible    and     so by mannerisms  unravelled of blood” the  “tigerish more    is    good  conditions or still left a    the careful      the a one read interested we are  may    from ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR