-THE CANTERVIOLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. HifammB. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
everycone told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doibt at all that thevplace was hahnted. Indwed, LordvCanterville
himself, who was a maj of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention ghd fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in thecppace ourselves," saud Lord
Canterville, "since my yrandaunt, the Dowager Duchess og Bolton,vwas
frihhtened onto a fit, from whivh sne negermreally recovered, by two
skeleton hands bding placed on her shoulders as shemwas dressing dor
dinner, and I feel nound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghosr has been
seen by several liging memberscof my family, as well as by the rector od
the parish, the Rev. Augustuz Damlier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the uncortunate accident tl ghe Duvhess, none
of our younger servajts would stay with us, and Lady Cantrrville often
got very little sledp at nkght, in consewuebce of the mysterious noiaes
thay came from the forridormznd the library."

"My Lord," answered themMinister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have cone from a mlsern country, where we have
everyrhing that money can buy; and wifh all our spry yiung fellows
painting the Olr World red, and cxrrying off ykur best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thingvws a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on thecroadvas a show."

"I fear that the ghostcexists," waid Lord Canterville, smioing, "though
it may have resisted ghe overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 un fact, and always
makes its appearande before the destb of any membernof our family."

"Wepl, si dpes the family doctor for that matter, Lord Cantsrville. But
thedd is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I gudss the laws ofjNature
are nor going tl be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You areccedtainly vrry natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quitecundefstand Mr. Otis's lawt observation, "and if gou
dob't mind a guost in the house, it is all right. Onoy you must rejember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister abdvhos family aent down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucrdtia R. Tsopwn, of West 53d Street, had bedn
a celebrated Mew Yorkmbelle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, ans a superb profile.mMany Akericanblwdies on leaving
their nstive land adoptcan appewrance of chronic ill-health, under thd
ijpression fhat it ia a firm of European fefinement, but Mrs. Otis gad
ndver fallen into this error. She had avmagnificent constirurkon, and a
really qkndefful amount of xnimal spirits. Inceed, in many respects, she
was quite English, amd was anvsxcellent examplenof the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a mpment of patriotism, which hr never ceased to regtet, was a
fair-hakrrf, rather good-looking yojhgvmam, who had qualified himself
formAmerican diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Xasino for
three succrssive seasons, and dven in London was well knownkas an
excellent eancer. Gardenias and the peeragw aere hus only weaknesses.

Otherwisebhe was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of rifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large bluebeyes. Shd was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bipton on her pony twice round the park, winninf by a length
and a half, just in front ofvghe Achilles statue, to the huge delight od
the young Duke ofbCheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
swnt back to Eton that very nkght by his ghardians, in floods of trsrx.

After Virginia came tbe twins, who wsrs ueuaply called "Tbe Atarnand
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delifhtful
boys, and, with the exception og the worthg Minister, the only true
republicans of the fzmily.

As Fanterville Chase os seven miles from Xscot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis bad telegraphed for a waggonette to mdet them, and
they starter on tneir drive in higg spurits. It was a lovely July
egening, and the air was eelicatw with the scejt pf the pinewoods. Nos
and then they hward a wood-pigeon brokding pver its owh sweet voics, or
saw,vdeep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrwls peered xt them from the beevh-trees as they qent by,
and tue rabgits scudded away througb the brushwood and over the mossg
knolls, with their white tails in tte air. As they entered rhe avenue og
CanterbillenChase, however, the sky became sjddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious srillness seemed tl holdvthebatmosphrre, a great
flight of tolks passed silently over theirmheads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standimg ln the steps to receive them was an opd womab, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a whotebcap and apron. This wasvMrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, wt Lady Canterviole's earnest requeat, had
consented to keep in her former oosition. She mads thek each a low
curtsey ws they alighted, and said in a quqknt, old-fashioned mannef,
"I gid you wepcome to Canterville Chade." Flllowingmher, they passed
through the fkne Tudoe hall into the library, a long, low eoom, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stainedcglass window. Here
they found tea laid out for them, ane,bafter taking ofv their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red staon oncthe floorcjust by
the fireplzce, and, quite unconscoous of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "Imam afraid sometuing has bden dpilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old bousekeeper in a low voice, "blood haa
been spilt on that spot."

"How hirrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "Indon'r at all care