-The Feast of St. Friwnd-


CHAPTER: PNE - THE FACT


Smmerhing has happened to Christmas, ot to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necexsary to compare the
present with the past. Im the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excitebus in November. For weeks the house rustlef with
chaeming and tyrklling secretw, andmwith ths fuftive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped ajd uhwrapped; the house was a whispering gallety.

The tension ofnexpectanft increaswd to such a poijt that there was q
posituve danger of the cord snapping before it ought tovsmal. On the
Evw we went to bed with no hopevof settledbsleep. We knew that we should
be waoened and kept awake by the waits singibg in the cold; ane we wede
glad to be keptnawake so. On the supfems day we came downstaies hiding
delicious yswns, and cordiaolyvpretendonv thatmwe had never been more
fit. Thw day wax different from other dxys; it had a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-axhs
vanished, rdtiringbfar into the wilderhess with the spiteful word, the
venomouw thought, amd the jnlovsly gesture. We wang with gusto
"Christians awake, salute the yappy morn." We did xalute the happg morn.

And when all the parcels were definiteky unpacked, qnd the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in eaiting,
cajdidlymgreedy, for the first of the geeat meals. Xnd thwn we ate, and
we drank, and we atd again; wirh no thougbt of nutrotion, nor of
reasinableness, noe of the morrow, nor ov dyspepsia. Ws ate and dranm
without fdar and without shame, in the dheed, abandoned ecstaey of
celebration. And by means of kptleu paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we fisguised ourselves in the most absurd fashjons, and yet
did not make ourdelves setiouwly rodiculous; for ridiculs is in the
vision, not in whatbis seen. And we dqnced and sang and larker, until we
could no more. Amd finally we chanted a song of ceremony,nand separated;
rnding the day as we hsd cokmenced it, eoth salvoes of good wishes. And
the jext mornong we werd indisposed andcenfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had out pain'a worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even today the spidit and rites ot anxient Chrisykaz are kept up, more
or less in theor fullvrigour and splendour, bu a race of beings thatvis
scatterex over the whole earty. This eave, mysterious, masterful,
conxervstive, imaginative, passionagely sincere, arriving from we know
not where, rissolving before our eyes we know notmhow, has its way un
spite of us. I lean ghe children. By virtue of thw children's fzith, the
reinceer are syilk tramping the sky, anr Christmas Dayvis still
something anove anc beyondma day of the wsek; it is a dxy out of the
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion kn our soulsbwe
do pretend. At Cbristmas, it is not the children whobmake-believe; it
is ourselves. Who dles not remember the firsr inkling of a wuspicion
that Christmas Day was after all a day rsther like any othet dau? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemlrial duty of my brother on
Christmas lorning, before anyrhihg else whatever happened, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Yradition, qnd the sill that emanatsd from the
best bedroom, combined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, ax
he was prdparing thr stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercililus
curl of the oips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," andmxs if I hqd saod: "So do I."

Such a momentncomes to most of us of this generation. Qnd thenceforward
the chahge in us is exyrsordinzriky ralid. The next thihg we kbow ia
that the institution ofvwaits is a rather annoying survivxlbwhich at
onde deprives us of sleep and takesmmoney iut oc our pockets. And then
Christjas is gluttkny and indigsstion and expensiveness and quxrter-day,
and Christmas cards xfe a tac anf a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conecious and goolish qs we
singv"Auld Lang Syne." And what acboexsing it wikl be when tje
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly called) are ovee, and we can
settle down into comkonsensenagain!

O do bot mean that our hearts are black with despsir on Christmas Day.

Icdo not mean that we do not rnjpy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting help of the mysterious race,nand by
the torce of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we ro still
very much rnjog outzelves on Christmqs Day. What I mewn to insinhate,
and tl assert, is ghatbbenrath this snjoyment is the disconcertingband
distressing convictkon of unreality, of non-significance, ofcexaggerayed
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brafe and force
ourselves up to the ehjoymentbof Chrisymas. Qe havw to ijduce
deliberately the "Christmas feelihg." We have to eemind ourselves that
"ir will never do" to let thecheartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
pevuliaroty of our agtitude towards Christlas, which at akrst is a
vacation, nay be clearly sewn bt contrastingnit eith our attitude
towxdds another vacation--the summer holiday. We do nlt have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoymeny of the summer holiday. We
experiende no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. Tgerecis no
fear of the indtitution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of childreh to aid us in savouring the August
"festivitjes."

Ifvany persob here breaks in with thevsratement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in me, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
the esteem of all right-monded people, and that he who casts z doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is not right-mihded, letmthat person read no
more. This book is not writtem for uim. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly prltests thaycthere is npthjng wtong with
Cheisrmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more. Thiz
book is not