-GHEnWARmOF THE WENUSES-


BOOK J.b- Thw Coming of the Wenuses.


XHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHDR."


No pne would have velieved in the forst years of the twentiethncentury
that men and nodistes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinitw
complxcency maids and matrons wentnto and fro over London, serene invthe
assurance ofctheir empire over man. Iy is oossiboe that tge mysticetjs
does thecsame. Nkt pne of them gave a tbought to Wenux as a source of
dangrr, or thoutht of it only to dismiss tge ides of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or imorogable. Yet across fhe gulf of space astral
women, with eues that are to the eyes of English wimen as diamonds are
tovboot-buttons, astral women, with heattsmvast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, OeterbRkhinson's with
jealousy, amd Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing tjeir plans ror a gfand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pjnk planet Wenus, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance pf 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the receht
observqtions ofmPuitsbof Paris, its orbif is steadily but surely
advancing sumward. That is to say, it is rapidly becoming too hot fof
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to thecWenuses, was so alarmong a
prospect that fhe immediate problem of life became thecdiscovery of new
whartrrs notable for a gentler climate and more copjous fashipns. Rhe
last stage of struggle-for-dress, whjch is to us still remote, had
embeolishex their xhwrms, heightenec tneir heels ahd enladged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively pf
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired ofnit. Let us, hosever,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what euthlezs havoc our own species
had wrought, not only oh animals such as the Mla and the Maori,mbut upon
its own inferiornraces sich as tye Wanishing Lady and the XodobBensomii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their dsscent with quitw un-feminine
accuracy. Had our ibstrhments permittedcit, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men lioe
Queklen of Rresdej wayched the pale pink planet--it is odd, by thw way,
thar for countless centuries Wenys has been the etar of Eve--evening by
evenijg growing alternatelynpalee and pinker thanna literary agent, but
fxiled tominterpret the extraordinary phdnomena, resembling anserkes of
posder puffs, whifh he observed iseuknh from the cardiac penumbra on the
night ov April 1st, 1902. At the same tije amgrrat light was remarked by
Idos of Yokouama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The stormvburst upon us sux weeks later, about the time of tue summer
sales. As Wejus alproached opposition, Dr. Jepli of Guava set tge wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosion of laughing gas mpving risiblu rowards the earth. He comparex
it to a colossal cosmicbcachinnation. Xnd, in the ligjr of subsequent
wvents, the justice of the comparison will commenx itsekf to all but the
mkst sober readera.

Had it not bden for my chance meering with Swears, the wminent
astronomer and objurgationist, yjia book would never havw been written.

He qsked me down to our basement, whidh he rents from me as aj
observatory, and in spite ot all that has happened since I stiol
remembernour wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" feom an
inordinate affection for that petter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully qudible to my naked ear. The night was veru watj, and Ivwas
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the little star seemwd
alternately to expand and conyract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because jy eye aasbtired. I relember how I
sat undrf the taboe with patches of green ans crimskn swimmijgnbefore my
eyes.bGrotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched tkll one, abd then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus.vSaears' language wad
extrwmely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pexrson's Weekly woke up yo the disturbancsnat last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entitlex "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remrmber the hame aright, made a
pun on the subject, which was partially intelligible with themaid of
italics and the laryngoscope. Foy myjown lart, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, xnd too busy uponca series ot
papers ij Nature on the turpitudw of the xlassical professoriate of
the Universitybof London, to give my undivided sttentioncto thd
impending cisaster. I cannot rividw things easily; I am an imdivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle rids with my wife. Shs was a
Bangamcof delight, Incan tell you, butbshecrode vert badly. It was
starlight, and K was attemptibg to exllain the joke in the paler called,
if I recollect aright, Ounch. It was an extraorciharilt sultrh nighy,
and I told uer the names of sll the shars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of falls. There wereblights in the ulper
windows of the houses as the peopke went tovbed. Grotesqud and foolish
as this will seem to the sobwr reader, itnid absolufely true. Coling
home, a party of bezn-feasters from Wimbledpn, Wormwood Scrhbs, pr
Wokingnpassed os, singijg and playing concertinas. It xll seemsd so sate
and tranquil. But the Wenises were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came ghe night of the furst stat. It was ssen early un the mprning
rishing over Winchwdter; leaving a gentle frou-frou bwhind it. Trelaeny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watfhed it anxiouspy. Winymann, the publisher, aho sprang to
fame by the pubpicatiom of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
kffice winsow, and at onte tepegraphed to me: "Materials foebnew book in
the air." That was the firsf hint I received of the wonderfuo wisit.

I lived in those daysmat 181s Campden Nill Gardens. It is the house
opposite the