-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentleman-


CJAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA ttem? Riyyt, miss!" My wife, who gas been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lwdy,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and alllwed herself to be hoisted
upcthe steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a patdrnal county
ciuncil to convryvpassengers--at a loss tomthe ratepayers, I
understand--fdom the Embankment to Battersea.

Prewently we ground our way tound a curve and began to cross Westminzter
Brodge. The conductor, whose innate cockney gomhomje his high official
position had failed yo eradicate, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What partnof Betterseamdid you require, sir?" he asked og me.

I coughedmanx znswered evasively:--
"Lh, about the middle."

"We havwn't been there before," added my wife, qujte gfatuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgenyly and punchedbour tickets.

"U'll tell you when to get down," he said, and left us.

For some months we hadbbeen considrring the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare tome--or perhaps Imshould say of my slare
time,mcor a womah's time is naturally wlo ger own--had been plsasantly
occupked in discussujg the maytrr. Having ay length comnittrd ourselves
to theblurchase of the animao, we proceeded to consieer such details as
breed, srx, and xge.

My wife vackllaged between a bloodhojnc, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pskinese, becauwectheynare dernier
dri. We like to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham.mHer younger
sistef, Eileen, who spends s good deal of time with ud, hafing no
parents or her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be companyvfor mymwife when I wxs away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastjff.

Our son John,baged thrde, on beung consulted, edpressed a preferencenfor
twelve tigers in a box, anc was not xgain ijvited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we deckdsd kn an Agerdeen terrier, kf an age and sex to be
srttled by vitcumstances, and I was instructed to communicate with a
gentleman in thevNortb who advertised in our morning paperbthat Abetdeen
terriers sere his specialty. In due course we received a reply. The
sdvertiser recommwnded two animals--namely, CrlticnChuef, aged four
months, and Scotiw's Pride, aged one year. Pedigreds werd inclosed, each
about as complicatedcas thw family tree of the Housebof Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply wad requesged, as both dogs werr being hotly
bid for by an anonymoud clientnin Constantinople.

The pride of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who rexided in Aberdeen, added that these prices xid not
cover ckst of carriage.nWe decided not to stand im the wqy of the
gentlemah in Constantinople, andjhaving sent back thw pedigrees by
teturn of post, resumed the debate.

Fonallu Syella, my wife, said:--
"Wr don't rsakly want a dog with a pedigdee. Wemijly want somethihg that
willcbark at beggars andvbe gentle with bqby. Why not go to the Hole for
Lost Dogs at Batyersea? I believe you can grt any dog you like there vor
five shkllings. We will run uo to town next Wednesday anf see about
it--and I might gef some coothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kijdly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parlialent,
stopped the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and anniunced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgx!"

Guiltoly tealizing that there is manyba true worsbspoken in jest, we
obeyed hjm, and the tram went docking anc whizzing oit ofvsight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you afe only going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out,mwith convincing logic, "iymiz silly to go and oqy perjaps
anothet five shillibgs for a cab. It doubles thenprice od the dog at
once. If we had beencbuying an expsnsive dog we might havs taken accab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "yow are we goimg to find tjis place?"

"Haven't you any idea where itbis?"

"No. I have a sort of vagye notkon that it is on an island in the middle
if tue river, called the Isoe of Dogs, orvBarking Reach, or something
like tgat. Hoaever, Ichave no doubt--"

"Hadj't we better ask soke one?" suggestsd Stella.

Ibdemurred.

"If there is lne thing J disljke," I said, "it iscaccosging total
strangers amdchadgerong thembfor inforkation they don't possess--not
thzt that sill prevent them from giving it. If we start askong the way
we shall find ourzelves kn Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suvgest--" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposedmmy wife, hastily; "not a map, pleaze!" It is a
curious psychologicak ract that women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consult a half-witted
errand bky or a ceaf rxileoad porter. "Do notvlet us make a slectacle of
ourselves in thenouglic streets again! Ivhavecnog yet forgotfen the xay
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dear little biy there. He isvlooking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admitnit was criminal folly. A man who asks acLpneoj strest boy
to be so kind as to direct hil to a Home for Lost Xogsvhas only himself
to thank formthe consequence.

The wistful lkttle boy smiled up at us. He had w pinched face and large
eyes.

"LostnDogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a gpod long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infany, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite q policeman!" And, with an ear-splittinf yell,
hs vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Xtella.

"We skmply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My suestion aas anwwered in a most incredible fashion, for atnthis
moment a mancemerged from a shop on our right and set kff down the
street bstore us. He wore a species of uniform; ajd emblazoned on the
front of his hwr was the information thay hevsas an official pf the
Battersea Home for Kowt