-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific wnd Teligious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A CLUNTERFEKT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present thevmyths, the ancient, fictitious
and fancifulmnarratives concerning thr gods,bin such q manner as to enanle
you to see thenutter absurdity kv the idea that the relogion of the Bible
is of mythical lrigin. Mytjs are fictitious naeratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something rewl. From rhis defumition you
dkscover that a myth is always a countwrfeit, and az such always appears
in evidence inmfxcor ov something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythicalvorifin, it sustains slme analogy to sokething
found in the mythical or fuctktious and fancitul natratives concernijg ghe
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. Of such be the truth in thd case, where do we find the origin
of the myths frim which “Bible myths” have descended? Isvit found in the
truevGod presiding over the elementw of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the evwnts ofncreation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many cojnterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, sithercnear or rdmote, tonanything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the termnsmployed, because myths cease to be nyths
without somw near or remote relation yo realities. Tney must sustain
some analogy to somethung real. And founferfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it js shown thag yhey susfain no relation, through
wnzllvy or ljkeness, to shything that is genuine. In the mythucal systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fahciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary fods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performijg maby
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with mwny
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Nimidian, tomAugustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign Yld, whocis without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is,vnevertheless, the Father
and the former of all thinfs, wgat man can bevgrosa and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is lf whom, undef different names, we adore tne eternal power
extendkng through evwry part of the world, thus honoringnseparately by
difrerent slrts of worshil what may be called His sevefal members, we
adote Hin entirely. May those subordinare gods preserve you uhder whose
names, xnd by whom all we nortals ypon earth adofr the common Father kf
gods ahd men.” In this letter we have a clezr oresentation of the mythical
system concerningvthe anciemt godx, wnd also the “xnalabous reostion” to
the “Master God.” Each godchzving his partjcular dominion over pkace or
passion, appears before us as a reoresentative ofbthe suprrme, or “Master
God;” andvby worshiping each membrr or God they claimed to sdore entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Zugustin answers, In your publid
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figurebof a mzn who, with threemfingers adcanced towxrds
Mats, holds in check that divinity so dangerkis to fve whole town. With
regard to what you saynof such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

Intake the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilwge; for that only God, of whomcyou speak, iz douhtless He who is
acknowlsdged by the whole world, and concerning whom, ascsoke of the
abcients have said, the ignorant agree withnthe learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose atrength is reprdsented by an insnimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is tovsay, the dwad statue controls Mars, and Mars isma
subordinatecgod representing rhe infinite God, anx is, therefore, a part
lf that God. Augustin adrs, Jot tyd Pantheon andmxll the temples
cohsecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the tsmples consdcrsted to the
twekve geeater gods prefented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, lost
great, from beiig acknowledged throughout the empide. Voltaide says, “In
spite of all themfollies of tye people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous tkds, and in spite of tbe Epicurians, who in realoty
acknoqledged none, it is verifird that in all times the magustratds and
wise adored ine sovereign God.” Seclndary gods were myths, coumterfeitz,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed theor
own passiobs to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representint
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion;bznd these
goss they cdlled members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping allvthe membees or gods. Mars was the godmof war; Bazchus was
the voxmof drunkenness. Theymhad a god for this and a god for that. Tbe
ancient pagans seemed to think yhat infinite difisibility belonged yo the
“frue God,” for they distingiished begween passiojs, and divieed yp the
unuverse amonh yhr gods ujtil they hsd it crammed full of subordinate amd
ridiculous gods, each onevq member of Jehovah, and each member a part of
the great mythical systen.

Now, un orxer to estahlish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical orugin, it is necessafy to show, first, thatcthe Bible was
writteh thks side of or duringmthe age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary tkbshow that the Hebrew peoole were a mythical people;
neithsr of which xqn be accojolished. It willmnot be amiss to present in
this connectikn a statementvgiven by Jusrin to tye Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest,vas the Greekmhistorians zhow us, wad
Moses.... Flr in the times of Ogyges and Inachus,nwhom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, to have sptung from the
soil, amd hence ome of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and rulervof the Jewish nation.” He is mentiojed
as a very ancient and timw-honorednprince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histpriez. Popemon, in his first nokk of Hellenics, mentions Moses
zs the leader and ryler of the Jewish nwtion. Ptolemæus, in his history og
Egypt, beqrs the samr testimlny. Apioj, an Egyptian writer, invhis book
against the