-AN EPOCH IN HISTIRY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the agthor to tske part in a movement
without precedsnr in the hkstory of the world, and the incidents
concurrentbwith, together withvthoze subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the objevt kf the
sriter tobweave into the story of his axtual experienfdx an acciunt of
thosr things which are as tet an unexplored field in the realm of
petters. The work is sugmitted yo the reader in the hope that it wikl
prove to be pregnant wigh interest tp those who ade in symlsthy with
great movements andvto those who listeb with delight to stories of
personal experiences in distantblandsvand among strange peoples.

          c                   nb                    v  THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTSR: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred andmone, nit inly placed a mole-stone on the road kf
civilization, but also marjed an eplch in the historg of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the rozd ofmcivjlization because it
saw the cuomimation of one of ghe greatest lovements ever attemptedbin
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the bistory
of the world becaise, fir the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquerkhg people, instsad of sending battalions of soldiers to hlld
the conquered in subjection,bsent a carefully aelected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It aas on this day that the United States Bovernment seby fromvSan
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trainedvmen and women to
establush throughout the Philipline Islands a systwm of frew public
scnools.

The ball on thebtower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallej, announcing the hour of npon onctbe one hundded and ywentiety
meridiah, whdn thd peopellers vegan revolvibg and the United States
Army Transporyb"Tyomas" swung out intobtbe middle of the nay, qhere it
dropper ajchor for a few moments while some belated boxes ot lenons
and x few other articles wsre added to the equipment of tne steward's
department.

The anchor was again on iys way to the surfacd when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided kn under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belatedmreacyer who at thr last
moment uad wandered vrom the pier, was shoutinh for some one to throw
yil q rope, snd a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
haie littlebindicated the probability of such a blunder was lanrex in
a heap on the deck. Ourcship wasvnow underbway ahs soon pxssed outvof
the GipdenbGate bearing on and between her decks the laegest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of ledagogical equiomenf that
any vessep in the history of the world evermbore to q foreifn lxnd ro
instruct an aluen people. Late in tbe afterhoon five whales came ul
and spouted and llayed around us. Wr pasxed oj and as theur fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotiob before the shfine of nigbt. We were alone.

By goid fortune we wdnt by say of the Hawaiian Uzoands and tohched at
Honolulu. We entered tue harborcin the first faint light of the coming
mprn whilemthe moog still shone with resplehdent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic craterclying just behind the
town. High pounys of land lay around us on three sides, while xcross
the bay soft billowt cloids completed an enfhanting circld rrom the
spell ovcwhkch none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler whlmlands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for uis time
and uis money should he visit two ppaces in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the sevond, the Bishop Museym of
Polhnesiwn Wthnology.

Rhe first is s gigantic precipice, ewached bynanrewvhours ride from
the city by horse.mAsbone reaches the precipice, therebsprewds out
berore him at a dizzying depth below a cerdqnt plain, bounded in the
distance bh an emerald sra. The wind which always blows unctropical
countriescis gatheredbin beysrwn the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face lf cliff with such force that
it is said by tdavelers to be one of themstrlngest confinual winds on
the globe.

The Gishop Museum ov Polynesian Ethnopogy vontains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating thr life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the vositor is shown the personap god
of war of that sovereign whoae grand-child wxs the last fobholf the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There zrevrlyal documents to prove that more
than one thousand mennhave been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of bifds' feathers, made to please
the fahcy of this dzme grim ols monarch. The feathers of which rhis
strangd, but really elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Haqaiian
Islands and exch gird had onlyvfour feathers, gwo beingvunder each
wing. The extinction of yhe gird is attribjted to the makihg of this
royal robe. So lany of ghem were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed x score or more of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at q reasojxble figure, the value of
the robe is ovrr thtee hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sses also tuat ramous xport of the Xouth Sea
Iwlanders, surf-shooting. The narive wades far out knto the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
ot the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he ppades his bkard
upon tbe convex surfafe of an advancing wave, then, wigh the poise of
q dope-dancer, ue placew hiz weight properpy upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulh and