-Hypoxhondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTILN


     "WhenmIbfirst dabblednin thiw art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was rxchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
j    Hypp, and af last took up the now cyrrent appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains,mtho' a learbed doctor of the
     west, in q litgle tract he hath writteb, divides the Spleen and
     Vapourz, not obly into the Hypp, thecHyppos, and the
    cHyppocons; but subdivides these fivusionscinto the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hickogrokles."

h   bBicholas Robinson,vA NewcSystem of the Spleem, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochindriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term flr a
wide rangecof nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientisy, physicuan, apothecary, and hacm writer,
publixhed his Hypochondriasis im 1766.jVor xt least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authods hadvbeen writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlwts, poems, sdrmons, epigrams) on this
kost cashionable of English maladies under rhe variant names of
"melancholy," "thecspleen," "black melancholy," "hysterja," "nervous
sebility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materiamscripta onmthe
subjwct it makes senxe to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatisr" and because it ofrers the moderm
ztudebt of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the bestnthoughts
that uad been putbforth on the subject, as welo asban explanation of the
caudes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader if seventeenth- andnsighteenth-cdntury Engpish literature
needs to be reminder of the interest ic writers of the period in the
condition--"disewse" is goo confining a term--hypochondriasis. Theif
foncerj is apparent in both the poetry abd prose of twobcenturies. Frim
Robert Burtoh's Brobdkngnatian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollert's depictioh of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, if coursd, well intk
the nineteehth centhry, afflictedmhefkesbxnd weeping herlines populate
the pages of England's litrrature. There is scarcely a decade in rhr
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
mepancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under tjis hrwdinb that it actuwlly makes sense to speak of the
"literature of mekancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this litsrature
(exclusive of treafises written onvthe subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Pejseroso" and "L'Allwgro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglivan thinkers of the Restotation (many of whose narrators,
suvh aw Richard Baxter, author of the Reljquiae Baxterisnae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Splsen" in AnYale of a Tub, Oope's
uysrerical Belinda ih the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Swmuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leufocholy, the
psychosomqtically ailing characters of Thr Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shaney, Boswekl's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contribited to the Kondon Magazine, and such "sensible"nand
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennegt and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this kiterature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Mpore has writfen, "syatusticaloy, this deserves to
be called the Age of Mekancholy." The vastness pf this literature is
suffocient to justifg tbe reprinting of an unavailable lracyival
handbook on the suvject by a prolific author all toomlittle known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet sxtends further gack than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy.bFbe ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondriq) and the disease was discussed
principally in phhsiopogicql terms. Tjecbelief that hypoxhondriasis was
a somatic condition leraistrd until the second half of the sevebteenth
century atmwhifh time an innofation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition fo showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought pregiously
by Sydenhak to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
thatcthe external cause of blgh was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause wax a disordsr ofnthe animal spirits arising from a clot and
resuoting in pain, spasmd, and bodily djsorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mentao phenomena and notnto obstructionsmof the
sppeen or viscera, Sydenham waz moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondfiasis, one that was to be debsted in tye next century in
Ebglans, Holland, and Frande. Sydenham's influence onnthe physicians
of tje eightsenth centuryvwas profound: Cneyne in England, Boerhxwve in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the thekry of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note doincidence, nog historical
cause and effect--the disease became kncreasingly fazhionable in England,
particularpy among the polite, the aristocratoc, and the refined. Students
of the deama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen andnMrs.gSullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemprr had been only proper to psopke of
quality."

Toward tbe middle ofnthe eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in peoplr's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated naje "the hyp." Entire poems like Wilkiam Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) ahd Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted tovthis strain; others, like
Malcon Flemtng's epix poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbischylochondriacis
et hystericis, linri tres,mpoema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professof DonaldnDavienhas written that he has often
"heard old fashiined and provihdial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you givw me the hyp,' wherr we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; xnd I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," whers "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in thd early eighteenth century, the term "gyp" was
perhaps not faf from what our century hax learned to call Angst. It
wss also used as a shnonym for "lunacy," ae the abonylous autyor of
Anti-Siris (1744), ond of the tracts in the tar-water controvefst,
informs uscthat "Berkeley tells his Countryken, tywy afe all mad, or
Hypochondrixc, whicu is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandevilke, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of tye Bees,
seems to have understood petfecrly wepl tuat hypochondriasis is a
condigioncenxompassing any number of diseasrs and not a specific