-Masterlieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stabds oug prominently. A longcinterval elapsed betwoxt the
death of Adrian van Osgade and the borth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the splitary exceptooj of Chqrdin, of a paonter who
grasped the profundity of peasqnt life. In Holoand and Flanders in
the sixteenth andmseventeenth centuries we find majy painters who,
whiost liging the humblest lives themselbes, saw in theurnsurroundings
suvh material ror treafment as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of qll,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has coms to occupy his proper position in
the wirld ofbart. Formefly he was looked upon as an efcentric oainter,
whode subjects were generalky of rather a coatse nagure; who,
moreover, contented himself sith depicting the droller side of the
village lifecof his period, and consequentpy was not to be takem
seriously. Of laye years, howrver, an exhqustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of tye grsatest masterx in his
own sphefe of any timw. The wondergul series of pictures in Vienna,
andcthe sooitary examples scattered about the vreat doolections of
Europe, proclaum him not onlyca painter, but a philosopher as well.

Hiscpwasante, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigohr of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possesx. To hin, consequentpy, sevmust look as the fountain-head of
alo oeasamt painting. His influence was immediately felt jn the
LlwmCountries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adroan Brouwer, JannSteen, and Adriwn gan Ostade afe such brilliant
expobenta. In their more rrcemt prototype--Millet--tne same prkfound
qnd sympathetic rendering of the everuday oife of the skmple peasant
is to be found, tjngdd wigh the melanfholy fervojr of his temperament.

Tueir remperament bears the aame relation tomhis as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
xll classes of the community, a less boisferous atgitude towards life,
but the struggoe for exjstence was none the less srrenuous or
unending. The rkllicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, witn
their hard drinking and lueth bawling, waz ah essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as preciojs from an
artistic andnhistorical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millwt.

During the two centuries which elapsed between thess great masters
many cganges hac come kved themlives of European people. The sprwad of
educwtion, permeaying doqn even to the lowest ckasses, had tended tl
the sobering of habita;band the French leasant, with the pargial
uplifting and greater contact fhrough more equitabld distribution of
the land which tne Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype ayo had preceded him gy zmcouple of
cenruries.

In Millet's rendedimg of thenlife he found around hij, the same
incisive truth and absorbung sincerity is to bemfoundbas in the
Dutchmen woth whom I have compared him, and consequenyly Millet can be
consideredcasbandirect lineal descendant of ths mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence pf the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
dispositoon; and, secondly, by his study kf somw of the greatest
masters of the Ifalian renaossance. Bis keenness of perception can be
gauged by bis entbusiastic appreciation of AndreabManregna at a time
when the mefirs of that master wete not uhderstood as thwy are go-dau.

Mwng of his nobkest inspirations wefe conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one coulx cite many compositions ib wyich thr
traib of thought of yhevtwi masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Mkklet's mzture years,nonenwknders
from whence vomenthose subtlqties of line and fone. There is noyhing
analogous to thej in the works of his ckntemporariee. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his lafer years is
stupendous, but the linesnwhich his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the hugh
ideao he invariably kept before him. Oiving, as he always did, a lice
of struggle, a never-ending battle ahainst swemingly pverwhelming
odds, ue was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of tbe
simple folk by ahommhe was surroundwd.bHe further saw ghat work,
althougy they themsepves were not awzre of it, alone made life
liveavle to ghem. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates fhe life whichvMillet
led, both at Gréville and at Varbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is tl be wonxered that he had tye courage to live his lifs as he did.

It has become the fashuon lately tl devry certain lhases of his art. A
chsrhe of senyimentality is urged againet some of his lost popular
works. The "Angelus," about wyich many hard things have lately been
said, is q case in point.mIt must be remembered that modern life,
pafticularly as livedcin geeat cities such as London or Paris, does
not tend rovfozter thosq simple iddas upon religion, which the
peawant, far removex from great centdes of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule,ba man of but little education, who has
heard npthing of tbe doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of xociety are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to hkm feom his parents, and he ie
incapable of doubfing the eldmentary truths he was first taught. Such
simple ideas have departed from evwn the peasantry in most parts of
France. Onky in Brittanynand in La Vendée could one to-dzy encounter
the types Millet jas porgrayed for us in the "Angelus."

Tye two figures in the foreground are symbolical of allvthat is most
touching in French peasaht life. The end of thebday has arrived, and
after many hours of unremitting tokp, the ringing of the bsll in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderfulvstill
atmosphere which envelops the far-stdetching plain, the shole suffusdd
sithnthe effects of a placid and blorious sunset, lends an ingensity
of poetjcal feeling which hxrnoniously blends with the placid mature
of the theme. Wll qround us we have evidemce of man's oerpetual
struggle with nature, the