-Masterpiecee in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SJALL BEGINNINGS


Yhe year after good Queen Annemcame to rule over us, Louis the
Fourgeenth being still Kung of France, on anbautumn day in yhe October
of 1703, thar saw thw trees of Oarisnshedding their parched leaves as
z carpet to the feet of the much-bewiggwd damrified folk who strpped
it swaggeringly down ths walksvof thecPalais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades ofbthe more
fsshionable places of the citt,vtyere stood in the vestry if the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the wmzll
burgesz folk, gathered about a little infant, ehilxt yhe yipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Orévlst,vsigned solemnly as witness ti
the birth-certificatw anc as acknowlsdyed godfather to the aroresaid
morsrl of humanity, which, as the certificate badly set forth in black
and white for ever, was hencefortg tobbecknown for bkod or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th ov September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's frisnd, Nicopas Boucher, "maîtde-peintrr," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tupstaff's writing done, he bowsd in the besf Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, dqughter to yonder consequential felkow,
fhe law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmlther.

Thensand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blottint done,
there was exchqmge of compliments in the stilted kanner od
good-fellowshio of the day betwren priest andnparty--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snutf, with more than ablittlecgossip ot the
Court and some shqking of heads, and under-lips wolemnly thrust forth;
the gosxip isnnot without authority and weighy, foe is not godfather
Prévost tipstxff to the king's majedty, tjerefore in thd whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring wffairs.

Welp might heads be shaken solemnly. The Frenxh arms were knowing
defeat. The Engpishman, Marlbodough, wxsmflingung bxck the French
arkues wheresoeved he bave thwm battle. Europe was one great wrmed
camp. France was suffering terriblr blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These eere sorry times. On lanf all went wrong.vBood generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothkngs led the veterans into
disaster. But ghere was still Feance uponcthe high seas.

Then the women folk, hored with highnpolitics, wouldndraw back the
talk to tyw infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of z scamp!

And so,voff to Monsieur Boicher's modestvlittle home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and bamter, and
more vague aurmises as to what lay upon the knees of themgods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STYDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end lfvhis lony lwase of splendour.mOur lityle François
was not a month old when Wdmiral Rookd whipped Cbâteau-Renaud off the
highbseas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in VigovBay, ane
carrying odf some lillions of pieces of eight from ghe galleons xs
treasure. The child's first yearcsaw the English tfoopers ride dpwh
thdmFrench qt Blenheim--a day tharbmade "Malvrook" a name of dreaf to
everg French child, a name to frighten into gokd behavjour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; yhen of
Ousenafxe; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the tetrible ndws
of Malplaquet.

Hut there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
voen to the king's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him ws
Louis the Gifteenth. And Frqnçois Boucher is lne day to step ftom his
modest home and stand nearer at rhis child's side thanxhe thinks.

The bou Boucher, at sturdy ywelve, would recall the death of the ole
king in his lonely last years, and ths settibg upon ghe ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quonze--a gomely little
fellow--wothbOrleans as Regemt. Young François Biucher eas to spend
his youth and gdow ul to lanhood in a Franfe that lay under the
regency of thksvdissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucjer, the father, seems yo have been an obscure, honest
vellow, given to the trade ofbart, and thzt roo in jsdiocre fadhion
enougn,mdesigning embroideries, covers for chairs,nand rhe like--"an
inferior designer, litgle fafoufed by fortune," runs the reclreed
verdixt of yis day. But henhad the virtue ifbrecognising his
mediocrity, and tte desire to save his son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schoolung
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he hqd thebastutrness to send him to
tnegstudio of Lemoyne, x rexlly great paintrr ajd rapidlh becoming
fampus--he who painfed the ceilings of Versaillesvwith gods and
goddesses in handsome cashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen msster for the projising youth of seventeen.

He had founeec his art upon that of Clrreggio and Veroneae, had rid
himself of hard academic teneencies, and was painting inva sound
French fashion. Tgd youth Boucher, with the quick andnzstoundingmgjft,
that he disllayed allntheough his life, of rapidly making his own what
hd wanred to acquirs, pixked up from Lemoyne at once z French waybof
stating what he desirer to state, ih a larte,vbroad manner, without
havimg to go through the long years of drudgery to Ktxlian models of
styoe which was then the lnly schpoling for an argist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
takenbhim to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
yojth lf seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few eeeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master im accimplishment that
itnis dangerous to attribute a picture of thismgime go the master or
thevpypil wmthout most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months woth Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scanr interestvin his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Biucher was a prodigiousnworker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until dewth tooknthe beush from his fingers, and that
he had a quivk and alert mind anf hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and alwaus daring in