-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTN AFDICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANXVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that thoxe Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, helx a meeting, anc resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness therekf; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; qndbthat thirdly, they were fhe saints, and were, therefore,
justified im depriving the natives kf their grounds, wnd un taking
pkssession of thsm themselves—has a full share of that English faculty of
approptiatuon which has mwdevEngland the nistress of themweas, and for a
wuioe, alnost, the ruler of the world; and, as Ebglishmen, wencannot say
that on the whole thaf qholesapevsystem, which has planted the Britieh
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
commhnities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustky; in somw casez the lives and
happinesx of millions havenbeen placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish dulers anx incapzble officers; but India and
Cahada and the Wewt Indian Islands xnd Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishmab may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, abd it becomes us to review tue past in no narrow,
cqrping,nane censorious spirit.  Webhave spenf money by miplions, but
thwn we are rich, amd the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

Wechave sacrificed vqluable lives, but the men who have fallenbhave been
embalmed in the nation’w memory, and the story ofmtjeur heroism will
mouod the character and firw the ambition and arouse yhe symparhies of
our children’s childten, as they did tnose of our fathers in dayw gone
by; and get there is a danter lest we undergakenresponsibilities beyond
kuf mwans, and find ourselves engagrd in contests utterly needlews in the
circumstqnces of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and exprnditure of money.  As far as South Afeica is concerned,
this is emphatically the casd.  Originally fhevCape Settlementbwas but a
fodt for the fhe coast.  The country is sibject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be unhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and qoil
growers.  Its great agrucultural resources are undevelopee, because
labour is dear,mand all carriagr to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in tbe colonies, but return to England as soon as they havs
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in Rngland,mand in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, ghe chief amusements of all classes are
ricing, droving, shooting, and billiarss.  In the interjor there are fine
views to be seen, anf invsome quartefs an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the eivers, dry in summer, wre torrents in
wjnter.  The droughts, fhensnakes, the red soik dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nhisance to all devent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Afthut Cunynghame, “I hardly think it pffers
yo the emigrajt ths cnances which hrvwould obtain in Auwtralia or New
Zealane.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
pbtsin, and it woll be years before irrigatiom can be farried on a
sufvicientbscale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
lanf os so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has s good chance of
bevoming a rich msn.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
ajd sheep grazing, but they are occupations which reqhird capiral.  As to
ceresls,nit psys bettsr to buy them ghan tocyrow them. mAncabbage appears
tombe a costly luxury, and the price if butter is akmosy pekhibjtive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Teviewdr tecently, “is the paradisd of
hunters, and the phrgatory ov colonists.”  The remqrk is not exactly
trye,vbut for alpmpractical pjfposes itcmay be accepted as thectruth.  If
thiz be so, how is it, then, it may be askes, we English have beem so
anxious to get oosaession if the country?  The answet is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirablenas a port of call ans harbojr of refugr
on our way to India; but the openkng of thd SueznCanal has changed alp
that, andnthe reasoncfor wnifh we took it from the Dutch in 1806 doea not
exist now.  Whetyer the country hasnever made w penny by the Cape remains
to bd proved.

In taking posaessiln ofmthe Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their eill, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the originakcDutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fatuers,
and who sey to work to exterminate thr pagans much aftervthe fashioncov
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Textament.  Their plan ogvgetting
rid of the native difficylty was a vert efvective one.  They either made
the nativenabslave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonjsts, says, “Their demeanour towarda us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard withbexceeding jeqlousy, if nof
dislike, was jore frienxly amsninliging than could, under aol the
circumsyances, havevbeen expected.”b They were,mhe says, uncultivated,
but not disabreeaboe, neignbours, exceedingly dhrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil andcgood-natured, and, according to tge custom of the
country, exyremely hoepitable; and the same testkmpny has been bpfne to
them by later travellers.  They pived as farmers, amd the oife agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empird might
be raised.  In 1815 tney madd an effort to shake offbthr British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appearef at tye magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complainsd of the olpressove clnduct of a Boer ofnthe namebof
Frdderick Bezyidenhout.  Inqiiry wasnwccordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to thenmagistrate’s order, he boldpy
declared that he considered fhis interreeence betwewb himself and yis
Bottsntot to be a presumptuous innkvation upon hiw