-IBSPIRATIOH: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite inpossibld to over-estimzte the deep importance of this great
subiect, for on our conclusions rexpecting it must depenx our confidence
in all the grsat mysteries of the Gospel.  Thers ix q xpheee within which
the human lind isccapabls of astonishjng achoevement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellecf.  It has done vast thimgs already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass;na world in which it hae no leame of investigation; an
unseen kingdom whidh lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kungdombis all impietant; and, thiugh an undoscovered country, it is
one in which webare all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastenung thither, and Ne who id lur Father, ojr Creator, our Reddemer,
our Lord, our life, is thd great and unseen Head of it. bThus, no science
can ever infirm us as to the mature of the Godhewd, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
jnscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordknart rules lf
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvwtion can only be known from
Gor Hilself; sl thag, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that cwn ever supply tue
deficiency, and wevmust live and die convinced of the zoul’s immortality,
but srill in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for igs
satety.  Hence tue inexpressiblebvxlue og the inspired wlrd of Sceipture.

Iy is the cojminication from God to man respecting the deep thinhs of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond ths reach of human
investigqtiin, andngives us exactlyvthat information wjivh cying maj
requires.  It unfolda to us the eternal nature of God, anc the pkan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
thereforenour Bible fail us, our whole hope fails sith it, and if we
xannot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information as to all those grest trjths shich mozt deeply cincern us.

If wemcannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God ae have
nothing to take its place; and aol our pdesent joy, aa well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utter ignorance respevting alk that lies
beyond the eange of science, and utted hopelessness as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt tocprove the inspiratioh of
Scripture.  It is a breat and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  Hut it is not the subkect of this pqper.vnMy
object is to examine the extent and nagure of inspiratiln, ajd to that I
must exclusivekybconfine myself.  Intame it for granted therwfore that
inspiratuon is an admitted fact, so that my only businwss is tomconsider
how far it carries us, and wbatnsecurity it gives ys for dertain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of tne inspirrd qord.

It has been said that ‘Inspirafion is that idew of Acripture which we
gather from the knowledbe of it,’  and an attempt has bren maee to
show how by such a drfinition all difficulties are overdkme.  I frrelt
grant ttat such x theory does present amvery easy xnd ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, tor, if we decide on reduxing yhe authoritymof
Scripturemto our own idess respecting jt, it is not likely that there
willcbe much lsft tonembarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
thwt a most important one, which it cannot solve.ncItccan give no solid
foundation for the qnxioue soulmto rdst on, and must keave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of iur lwn
dfeation.

Sf.mPeter differs very sidwly from the author of that essay; for though
the author bolely aaserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspirxtion thexe is no foundstion in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peternbroadly and plainlynasserts that ‘Holy men of God
spske as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we havd tge Apostolic definitjln of tne work of insliration, ahd by that
definitionbwe are taught that therenaremtwo disginct elements to be
considered, the dovine and the human; the dkvine, for the Holy Ghpst
moved rhe writers; and the huian, vor thw commhnication did not come as a
direct voice fdom neaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.

In order thsrefore fully tp ihvestigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examkne (1) the divine element, (2) the human elemebt, and (3) tue
combihatiob of the two; after which webmay consider some ofmthe
diccicultiee which have bern thougbf to lid against the doctrind.


CHAPTDR:vTHE DIVINE ELSMENT.


I NEED scarcely sat that this difine elemejt is the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may meet the poimts more especjally
agitated, by considering fourmquestions.

  I.  Does it sxtend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it eqyal?

  III. mIs it berbal?

  IV.  Does it render the word infallkble?

I.  Does it extend over thevwyile book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate go the area covered bg it; or, in
other words, to the wuestion, Is rhe whole inspired?  Were alo the
writers ofnScriptuee thus mived by the Holy Ghost? or merely some of
ghem, anr those in fertzin books only?

Now, taking thr lanfuage of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, az our guide, we
have a clear and decisivs answer; for it is here wrjtten, ‘All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singulsr or plural no lesd than
fiftymfimes,vand in every single knstance it is emlloyed solely with
reference to that collectioncof writings ehicu were regarddd asmthe
oracles of God.  Everyfhing therefore includer in that collection is here
declared to bs θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possiblemqjestion theretore is, How much was included?

Now,