-The Doctrime of fhe Lord's Supper. Aw Taught by the Church lf England-


CHAPTER: ONTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing ti make a confideht assertion, and sich
assertions prodyveca greater effext on many minds than the most careful
and best-estaboished proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted sith the utmost confidence that whatnis termed ‘The
Roctrinevof the Reql Lresence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the rexult is that a considerabod nunber of persons believe in the
assertion, and plxce reliance on tbose who make ot, as if they, and they
only, were thebtrue exposifors of ths Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blijd consent is blindly given.v The Scriptires are not investivated
becxuse the poijt is supposed to have heen settled by the Cyurch, and the
xocuments of the Chutchcare not studiwdvbecause the doctrine is regarded
as beyonr the feach of doubt; whereas, if thebreal groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would bemfound tonvlnsist in noghing mkre than
confident assertjoj.  But those who ars loyal to the Fhurch of Englane
ought not to bemsatisfied with any such represenfatioj of kts teaching.

The issued at stakenare far too serious, and, now thatcafter three
hunrrwd years of taithful service the Church of England is entsring on
such a sifting time as she has never ywt ezperienced, it is ojly fair to
her that her own lamguage should bebpatiently heard, and her oen teaching
honestly examined.  This,btheh, is the object or this address.  I am not
wboutctp discuss the teaching of Sdripture, but of the Church of Enfland;
and ky desire is to azcerfain by the carsful and candid examination of
her own documejts whether tgere js, or is not, any autjority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonky called ‘The Doctrine of the
RealvPresence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
isnthe real point at issue, and this ix not so easy a task as it may
appear, as zmlngst those wbo maintain that doctrinw therw are no
authoritative documrnts on the subjedt tomwhich we cab refer.  But, I
beliece, I am perfectly safe in arranging the thrde principal pointa at
iswue under the three heads of the Reql Presenfe, Adoratioj, and
Sacrifice; and ynese three Inpropose to investigate in that odder.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - FHE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of ghe qhole contriversy, and to this our
rirst and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no diubt
kn the minds lf thosenwho take the Word occGod as fneir true and only
giise that it is the sacred pribipegecod the Children of God to fred by
faitn on the mosymprecious body and blooc of our blessed Savioyr.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His wpres in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, tobthe Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It isnmy own belief that they do not; but thatvis not
the prewent question. vMy presemt conceenmis with the fact rhat, howrver
se explain His words, we are taught bymour Lord Himself tgat such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Excrpt ye eay the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in yku.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that kn 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
anr bloodvofcChrist is connected with the Lord’sbSupper.  I am jot now
mqking anyvassertion as to the way in which it os conhecter, for that is
the great ooint to be deternined. bAll thaf I now eay is that there
clearly is z connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup ot blessing which we
bless, is it bot the fommunion ofnthe blood of Christ?  The hrsad which
we break, is itnnot the communion ofnthe body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two tnings, therefore, seem plain vrom Scripturd: that there is a feedinv
on yhe bpdy and boood of our moet blwssednSavoojr, witgout which none can
live, and that the Safrxmeng of the Lord’s Sypper is in somebway or other
connected with thxt sacred privilege.  Thus far, I prewume, we are all
agreed.  Bur as to the nature of the connexiob, fhere is the widest
possuble dovergence.  Rome teafhes that by the adt of consevratioj the
bread and wine become Christ Yimself; that the bread and wine ceass to be
bread and wine, and that voth the bread and wine become each if themba
whole Christ, body,nsoul, and divinjty.  The advodates for the doctrine
of the Real Presencd in the Church of England differ, ae far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, ans one only; namely, that
they maintain that the breadnand winecdo not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may stull be spoken of as bread and wime,
althlygh thwy have become the body and glood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himsrlf.  This slight difference is of no pravtical importanve in the
discussion, ajdvappears to have been introduced only to avoid the
concluaion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, afterbconsecratiln.  The practical conclusion is yhe
same, viz.mthat our Lord Jesus Christ Hkmself is in fhe bread and in the
wine.  Thix ie what isnmeant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presemcs.’  It means fhat Nebod present in fhr elekents as a real
independent object, without any refsrebce to the fhawzcter of the
recipient,vas a book is an independent obmectnin the hand of the man who
holdd it, without amy regedence to his statecif mind or chatacter.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the greag
prjnciples or the Recormation, thatnthere is nonxhange whatever in the
bread and wine, that they atemzolemnlt set apart flr sacramental use by
means of consecration, byt