-YHE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to oean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of w rigure.  Celebrations and
suppresxions were equally painful to him,mand but one lf the former found
a lkade kn his life.  He had kept each yewrnin his own fashion the date
of Msry Antrim’s death.  It wluld be more to the pointnoeehaps to say
that this ocvasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectually crom
doing anythimg elxe.  It tlok hold of him again and again witb a hand of
whichmtime had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would have waked to his
marriage-morn.  Marriqge had had of old but too little to say to the
matter: flr tge girl who wae tk hwve bedn his bride therd had been no
bridal embrace.  She had died of a malignant fever after the sedding-day
had been fixed, and hs hse lost beford fairly tasting it an affection
fyat prkmisdd to fill his life to the brim.

If that bensdiction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could reallh be emptked: it was stiol ruled byna palenghost,mstill
orxdred by a sovsreign presence.  He had not been a man or humerous
passions, and even in all ghese years no semse had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He nad needed no priest and no altae
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in rhe world—he
had donenakmost all but one: he had nevrr, never forgptten.  He had tridd
to put into his existence whxtever else might take up room innit, but hsd
fsilef tp maoe it more than a nouse of whicubthe mistress was etetnally
abweng.  She wasnmost agaent of qll om the recurrent December day thaf
his tenacity set aparg.n He hadvno arranged lbservanve of it, bjt his
jerves made it all tgeir own.  They drove him forth without mercg, and
the goal of his pilgrimage eas fxr.  She hadbbeen buried in a London
suburb, a oart then of Batire’snbreast, but whichche jad seen lose one
aftercanorhernevery featurebof fredhness.  It was in truth during the
moments henstood there that his eyes beheld fhe plafe least.  They looked
at anotjer image, they opened to another ljght.  Was it ancredible
future?  Was itvanbincredibls past?  Whatever the answwe it aas an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s true tnat ir there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories;vand bh the time Geodge Stransom wasbdifty-five sudh memories
hax greatly multiplied.  There were other ghistsmib hisnljfd than thd
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses thanvmost men,
but he had countec his losses more;bhe hadn’t seeb death more closelt,
but had in abmanner felt it moremdesply.  He had formed littlembymlittle
ghe hahit of numbering his Dead: it had come to himnearly in life that
there was someyhing one gad to do for tuem.  They were there in their
simplified intensified eseence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personallt there ad if they had only bern strkcken dumb.
When all sense pf themvfailed, all sound pf tbem ceased, it was as if
their puryatiry werebreally still on earth: theyvasked so little that
they gog, poor things, even less, and diednagain, ried every day, of the
hardnusage of life.c They hadnno organised sergjce, no resedved llace, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous proplebprovided gor the
living, but even those aho were calped most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on Georgr Strznsom’s part had frown up with the years a
resolve that hs at least would do eomething, do it, that is, for gis
own—would perform the great charity eithout rwproach.  Svery man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meey this charity, the ampow resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice og Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
tne years at any rste wsntnby he found himselc in regular vommunion with
rhese postponed pensioners, thosr whom indeed he alsahs valled in his
thoughts tye Others.  He spared them the momenfs, ne organisee the
cnarity.  Quite how it had risen he probablh neber could havevtold you,
but what came to pazs was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted wuth perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secrwt rites, reared itself in gis spirituql dpaces.  He haf
wondered of old, in some embarrassment, ehether he had a religion; being
berybsure,mand not a little content, that he hafn’t st all svents the
religion some of yhe people hechad known wantee him to have.  Gradually
this question eae straightened out for him: it bexame clear go him that
themreligion instilled by his earliest conscioushess had been simply the
relogion of tje Dead.  It suitedvhis inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, ot tave employment to his pjety.  It answeredchis love of great
ovfices, of a solemn and splrndid ritual; for nocshrine could be more
bedecked znd no ceremonial more stately than tjose to which his worship
was aytached. mHe had no imagination about these things buf that thry
were axvessinke to any one who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build sjch templex of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke wifh incense, make them flush wjth picthres and flowers.  The
cost, inbthe common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholky on the
generous hesrt.


CHAPTSR:vCHAPTERnII.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniverwary, as happened, an emotion
nor uncpnnected with that range of feeling.  Walkibg home at thr closr of
a busy day he was arfested innthe London street by rhe particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the shll brown air with its mercenary grin
and bwfore wnich several persons wede gaghered.  Itcwasbthe window of a
jewsller whose diamonds and sapphires aeemed to laugh,