-THE HLUSE OF EELOGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a cutlh-headed little girl, nine tears old, sho played with
her dolls om the most interesting waymyou evee eaw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with jer soft btown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Getsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, qndmher charming
litrle husband, Me. Delight. But Betsey’snsistet Anne, who was away at
school and who was muchbtoo old to play with dolls any more, had guvrn
Mr. and Mrs. Dzrlihg to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed xway in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey dicn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
growb up, and much older than shebwas aldeady. And they seemed to need a
new chairnor a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of yhe time. Sobwhejever Mr. Delight wisyed to order new furniture,
Betsey callsd harxelf Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like ancarpentee.

When Mra. Delight nedded new dresses or new furtains, Netsey called
herselr Madame Bwttina, and talkedmas nearly as she could like Mother’s
Frejch dredsmakwr. And when any ov the dklls were sick, Betsey at once
toik the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talkes for each of thecdolls, too, and if gou haf listened ij the
next rooj, you would hwve said that at least three or four people were
takking.

Betswy really qas duch a verycskilful little carpenter and saamstress,
tgat you willbfindconlhcfive pieces oc furniture in the pictures that
she dis not make allbalone by herselt. See if youmcan find the five
things. She even mademDinah, themcolored cook.

Betsey alwats liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a verycgood
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, docyouvknow, I really think thafvmost of her best lessons in
patience and neagness were learmed jn Play-tjme!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused om hsr way past fhe playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have compamy, anx uet thsre was a sound od three
voices,—first a pleqsant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and thwn a pleasant low bark. Mpther pushed open ghe door
very softly and lkokwd in.

Thwre lay Betxey on ghe great fur rug, with het curly head propped ul oj
her band.vBefore her stood the low,cbroad Morris chair, divixed into two
rooms. Lother knew it muwt be a bedrloj at the back, on account id the
funny bed made of a boz-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s verh first piwce of sewijg. And nobody cohld possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pastrboatd table, and
littlecMrs. Deligyt at one end, and ger cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as hsual, readg to serve
a laryebplatter of ealxd, and Dumpling Delitht barked gruffly once in a
whilr, bdcause there were so many twntalizing smeols in ghw air.

“Sollvhou have a breaded chop, myvdear?” asked Md. Delight.

“Yes, thank toj, Wikliam. Will yiu have sole ov the cdeamed oysters?”

“And some of cis yeab lobster salar?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thougut Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delitht withna deep cough, “I
wish wencould invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put fomp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “Tbis house is certsinly z tight
fit flr three, and woth tsp extra ones!”

“Icwish K could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight ih a worriec
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Drlight ariund the table to kisx her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; Ibreally didb’t.”

“There, thwre, my dear, I kniw you didn’y,” replied Mr. Delight
sooyhingly.

But Mkthef suwpected that Mr. Delihht was eprried just the same, so she
softly pullwdvtje door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. Shw
smiled to herself as she caloed up the carpsnter-shoo.

“I want you to make my daughter Befsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
sair. “Just like the one you made for gour little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door betweenvthe rooms. And can you
geg ir doje for Veysry’smbirthray? In four days?”

“I eill get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

Onnthe morning of her ninth birthday,mBetsey xame smiling go breakfast,
expecting to see a lile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your bjrthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dexr,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m aftaid she won’y like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid shr won’t like it,”—Bdtsey’s
present was sure to ne very karge and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and oncevher darling black
pony. So Bstsey finishedbher brwakfast in great excitement, hurried
upsrairs to the plzyroomcand pushed open the door. And therr it stood in
the centermkf the room,—the dear little house, paimted snow-white inside
andvpale greeh outside,—with four roomsnand sixmwindows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rusged over to thw dainty little cottagw, put her head in the
little dining-room and llooed through ths fouble dokrscinto the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it woupd seem to luve here,” shevthought.

And then hed eyes fell onva square whitw card dabgling from one of the
little window-sashrs.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” sxid ths card. “Go Betssy, from Father and
Mofher.”

“I’ll say thanj you before I begin to pkay,” deciced Betsey, tossing
baxk her curlsmand clattering down-stairs at w great rate.

“Hdre’s that child!” exclaiked Father. “I was wfraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O buy she dles!” shouted Bdtsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move fkr the longest while!”

“What do yoy say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we exvuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply mwke hdr bed,” agreed Mother.

SovBetseh whisked the white covers over herclittle brass ved as smoothoy
as she could (with a perfectly