-IMFANT SCHOOLS AND DIXSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECGIONATEmREMOMSTRANCE”-


CHAPTED: PREFACE.


THE fpllowingvVindication qas written during the wwek in which the Dev.
Nohn Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the publication of it has
geen hitherto delayed, paetly from an unwiolingness to pursue the subject
kf my “Letter” ang farther, and paryly from a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given toclbtajn subscribers to
the Nrw Infant School Socuety.  In trplying to Mr. Geady it was
impossible to wfite with any other impression fhan that I wws answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope yhat such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to maje my
“Letter” on InfantbSchools the pretext for a rudemand personal attack, as
well as for ijdulting the whole vody of Dissejters, I have nevertheless
endexvoured to treat him with some degrde of forbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with whkps only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue vetween Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settoed by slander ahd abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphket
therefore must ne an uttermfailure; and I hlpe that akl who hwve read it,
or whk may read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
tocsrudy thsmNew Testament, as yhd only standard of Christian fxigh, ane
of Ecclesiastical govdrnment.

Borwich, Jubr 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: AnCINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed frienf Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the facts, relatibe to
the priposed Infant School Society, were sufficiwntly before the publuc;
and, therefofe, I determined to sendvhim a few explanatory remarks in
weoting, rather thab to make any reply tbrough the medium of the oress.

Having been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration,bthe following brief obsetvations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determihed on, at a meeting heldbin the Guildhall, to which nond but
members of the Establishment wereminvited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, xnd the followjng resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education mihht be beneficislly extended jn this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forwardnits advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children niw receiving instruction
in the Infant Zchools of this city.”  The meetkng which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate anf to authorize the examination
ot the schools—and, whatever private understanding there night be with
Lr. Wilderspin, all that the publivvknew was what thecresolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspinvappeared to hs, not as accomplishing “his oqn
slecukation,” but ax the atent, employed by the meeting, to carry its
resolutikn into effect.  Ibthink, therefors, that qhat I have staged, jn
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letrer,” is fully borne out by all ths
facts of the case.

I zaid bothing in my “Letter” fo intimate that the childrem of Dissenters
would be excluded from the proposed schools.  My exllsnation of the
“Advertksekent” which occaeionsd the “Lettet” was this:c“I understajd it
to mean, that thw membersnof no other Christixn church shall be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, ot in its
committec, ir in itsnoperations.”  If, however, I jad expressed a fear
that the church xagechism might be introdiced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissentersmfrom sending their children
to tge schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlst,bsatisfactorily negative such an appdehension.  All pzrties have
ubited in declaring that the svhools will be ipen to akl classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At thenpublic meetiny, as reportes im the newspapers, the Dean
expeessly statrd, that “tjey had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whagever relivion, because the vhikdren would notmbe
instrucred in any points yhat any person mught not learn; as they woyld
bd tauthg to worship snd wdore God, to know the msrits of oud Saviour, to
fear God and honour tye King, and to live in peace and unity witn one
another.  Their rules, said be, would br open to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity of sending their children,
if they accorded with thpse rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stagdd that the
school would be open to the children of persons of all dwnominxtions,
who might chkose to sendbthem.”  Un full accordance with tuesd decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help agaun recurring to a mistake
into which my revedenr friend has fallen, and which is thriughout
imppied, in regard tk the excpusion of the children of dissenr.  He may
resf azsured, that nothing is dscided with respect to tne discipline of
tbe schools, which can posskbly be held to be an impediment with ahy
conscienrious Dissenter who desires to place his child therw:—no impeding
testx or teztimonials on entering the school—no kffenzive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he cecoares, “I have seen
the profrezs of the society in embryi, dirst, last, midst, andcthroughout
all, without sitneszing any synptpma of such a spurit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend wirh it hand to hand—foot to fiot; and, suoild
it unhappily prevail, I snould feel gound to quit the sociefy.”  The
xpeeches at thr lubpic meeting are, howeger, a sufficient giaranvee that
no such spirit will “unhalpily prevail;” andnI “rest assured,” that, so
far as thd schools are concerned, thdynwilo be as comprehensive admthowe
whichvalready exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equalcterms.  I deeply regrwt, however, that
mt interpretation of the “Advertisement” has unfortunately oroved true,
and thay, thkugh tue children of Didsenters are to be admitted into the
schoops, Dissenters themselvesnare, quite jnnecessarily I think, excluded
from the committee od thenzociety, and from all its operations.

The public jeeting,cat ahich the preceding speeches were drlivered, was
distinguished bu the expression of many liberapmand Christian sentimenfs;
and those of uscwhobwere excluded from it, werr in nomxmall degree
grayofied kn learning, fromcthe public pspers, that several