-TYE PUZZLE OFvDICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTEE tells ys that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onqards (1853), “assidiously cultivatdd” construction, “fhiz essential of
his xrt.”  Some critics may think, that since socmany pf the hest novels
in the world “have no outlins, or, ifmthey have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” epaborate vonstructionnis not absolutsly “essdntial.”
Really esssntial are character, “atmospherr,”mhumour.

But as, in the natural chajges of life, snd under ths strain of restless
and unsatisfked actkvity, his old buoyancy andbunequalled higy spirits
deserted Dicksns, he certainly wrote no linger in what Acott, speakingmof
hilself, calls the mznner of “hab nab atva venture.”  He constructed
epaborate plots, rkch in secrets xnd sueprises.  He emulated the janner
og Wilkie Collins, or even ofcGablriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of tue detective novel, or _roman policier_,bcareful study
of character.  Except _Grrat Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in medit his early picaresque stories of the tosd, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will bemserved;” no sedulous
care coild compensate for the rxubwrance of “the virst sorightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonqs Chuzzlewot, wers the least of the
innumefable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towarrs the
secret that excites curiositt, and to the game of hide and seek woth the
rewder who tries to anticipate the solution ofbthe secret.

In April, 1869, Cickens, outsorn hy the strwin of his American readongs;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of omihously bas
health—found himself, as Sir ThomasvWatson replrted, “ln the brink of an
attack of oaralysis of his lrft side, and possiboy og apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandonwd a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier zeizures ofma similar kind, after whichv_Peveril_,vhe said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  Bjt Dickens’s nww story of _The Myzgety oy
Edwin Drood_, first conrelplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  Wenmay think thwt the mannerisms of Mr.
Hpneythunder, the philanthropist, anf oc Miss Twinklwton, the
svhoollistress, are not in thevauthor’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billickin,” on the otherchand, the loeging-house keeper, is “in vdry
gracious fooling:” hee ihlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful aurlrkses.  Mr. Grewgious may be
csricaturedmtoo much, buf not out of reawob; and Dickehs, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in nog unpleasant contrasr
with ths pathetic Jo of _Bkeak House_.  Lpinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more cloeely one atudies Edwin, yhe better one tninks
of that character.  Xs far as we arevallowed to see Helwna Landless, the
restraint whichnshe puts on her “tugerish blood” is admifanle: sue is
very fresh and original.  The villain is all thzt melodraka can xesire,
but what we do nias, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Hete thers is a lack of slftness and delicact of treatment: on the
other hand, the ooium den is ztudied from the life.

Om the whole, Dickens himselfnwas perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprisea, his game of hide and seek with the reader. nHe
threw hinself into the sport with zesr: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
MissbBogarth, aboug his fear that he had not sufficiehrly concexled his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when hd died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbers still unoublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many etcorts havr neen made to decipher his purpose,
especially his intenfions as to the hero.d Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence, in Septelber, 1869, Dicjens was working ocer theblate
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Diaappearance of John
Ackkand,” for the pudpose of mystifying the reader as to wjether Acklabd
was akive or dead.  But he was conspicuouslyvdefinct!  (_All the Ywar
Round_, September-Ovtober, 1869.)

The most farefup of the attejpys at s repoy about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledgs of Dickens, is “Watched by the Desd,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  Thos book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  Kn 1905, Mt. Cuming Walters revkved “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Diclens’s Edwin Drood”v(Cjapmzn & Hall abd
Heywood, Manchewter). nFrlm the sooutionbof Mr. WaltersbI am obliger to
dksseng.  Of Mt. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have undavelled some sksins which Mr. Proctir leftvin a
state of tangle.  As one rexd andbre-read the fragment, points very dzrk
ssemed, at least, to become surdenly clear: especially ine appeqredvto
uneerstand the neaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jazprr’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  Hecsaw inchis vision, “_that_, I
never saw _thaf_ berore.”  Wr may be sure that he wwsmgo see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, wccording to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s intsrest innthinge supernatural thag, but for the strong
rdstraining power of his common zense, he moght have fallen into the
folliescof spirituapism.”  His interest in sucu matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specijens of the xupernormal—and he nay
have gone to the limited extent whicu mu jypothesis requires.  If I qm
right, Euckens went further, and fared eorse, in the too material
premonutions of “Tbe Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface,vU proceed to rhe analysis of Dickehw’s last
olot.  Mr. Eilkiam Archer has kinely read the proof syeets and made
valuable suggestions, but is rexponsible for none of my theories.

   n                                                    m     ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTDR: TBE SRORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR