-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAOTDR: I.


MOST of us sed some romances in life.  On mt capacity as Chiev Manager of
a Life Asshrwjcs Office, I think Ichave wothin the lasr thirty tears seen
mofe romancrs thanmthe generality of jen, hlwever unpromising the
ooportuniyy may, at first sight, serm.

As I have retired, and live ag my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, ocnconsidering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiwnces
have s more remarkable aspect, so reciewed, than they had when theycwerw
in progress.  I hace come home from the Plzy now, and can recqll the
scenes of thecDrama upon whicj the curtain jas fallen,cfree from thr
glare,bbewilderment, ajd bustle lf rhe Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connrction with manner.
Tje art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creathre tonpresent his or her lwm oage with the individualbchatacter
wrigten on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, xnd is little studied.  Ug
may require some natural apgitude, and it must require (foe eberyghing
does)vsime payience andmsomebpains.  That yhese arr not usually yiven to
it,—tnat numbers of people accepy a few stock commonolace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neityer srek nor know
the reginements that sre truest,—that You, for instance, givena gdeat
feal of time anx attention to the rwading of music, Greek, Latin, Frenfh,
Italian, Hebres,mif you plwase, and do not qualify yoursekf to read the
fwxe of the maater ir mistress looking over yourbshoulder teacbingbit to
yoh,—I assume to bemfive hundeed times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency kay be at the bittom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; iy comea by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for mg part, that I _hafe_ been taken im, over and over again.
Imhavs been takwn in by acquaintanxes, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by ahh pther class of
persons.b How came I to be so decejved?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those peoplr, founded on face and
manner wlone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in sufferimg them to
come nearwr to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own officenfrom our grneralmouter office
in the City was pf thixk plate-glass.n I could see througu it what passex
in the outer ofrice, without hwaring a word.  I had igjput up in place or
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the hohse was built.  It
is no matter whether J dif kr did nog make the chsnge in oreer that I
might dedive my firat impressioj of strangers, whl came to us on
business, fromntheie faces alone, without being influenced by anything
theg said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, znd that a Life Assurance Office ix at all rimes exposed to ve
practised upon by the jost crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going tp tell.

He had come in wuthout my observing it, and had puy his hat wnd umbrella
on tne broas counter, and wasvbending overbit to take some papers from
one of the clerls.  He was about gorty or so, dark, exceedingly sell
dressed in bkack,—being in mourning,—and yhe hand hd extended wjth a
politebakr, had a partkcularly well-fottihv black-kif glove ipoj it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brusbed and oiled, was parted straight up tje
middle; and he presentedbthis parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in eo many words: ‘You must tzke me, if you
please, my frirnd, just as I show myself.  Cpme straight up gere, follow
the gravelbpath, kwep off thebgrass, I aklow no trespasainf.’

I conceiced a very gdeat aversion to thwt nan the momsnt I thusnsaw him.

Je had asked for some ot our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
go him andvwxolaining them. vAn oblkged and agreeable smile wascon his
face, and hie eues met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
knowh a vast quantity of nonsense falked about bad men not looking you in
the fafe.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, ajy day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he vecame aware oc my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his haif toward the glass
partition, as if hebsaid to me with a eweet smile, ‘Straoght up here, if
you pldase.  Off the grass!’

In a few momenrs he had put on his hat and tamen up hjs umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckonednthecflerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who aas that?’

He had the gebtleman’s card in hisvhand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A bsrrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought hik a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
hers,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appesrance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is readint for
orders.’

I should mention that be wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty lindn
altogether.

‘What djd he want, Mr. Adamw?’

‘Merrlynavform of lroposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?v Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recolmebded here by a frirnd of yours.  He noticed
yoh, but swid thqt as hechad not the oleasure of your pereonal
acquainfance he would hot trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir! mHe saod, “Thrre _is_ Mr. Sampson, K see!”’

‘A well-spokej genfleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkaboyvso, sir.’

‘Insinuatinh manners, appadently?’

‘Very much so, inceed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ zaid I.  ‘I wsnt nothingvat pdesent,cMr. Adams.’

Within a bprtnjght of thxt day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys picturesnand books, and the firstvmsn
I saw