-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in of mysterious noises
that from the and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the as a show."

"I that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and family went to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in moment patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase seven miles from Ascot, railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the scudded away through brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, their white tails in the air. As they entered avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed over their heads, and, before they
reached the house, big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found laid for them, and, after taking off wraps,
they sat down and began to round, Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, voice,
"It is the Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who murdered on
that very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. His body has never been discovered, his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"That is nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked round his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for England."

"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't
faint after that;" and in few moments Mrs. Umney certainly to.

There was doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to house.

"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that make
any Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of
Providence new master and mistress, and arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain blood once again on the floor. "I don't
think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington,
"for I have tried it everything. It must be ghost." He
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but second morning
it appeared again. The third morning also it was there, the
library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis
began to suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the
Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs.

Myers and Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crime. That doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper. The conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since learned
from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of
cultured Americans of better class, such as the immense superiority
of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the English houses; the importance of Boston in development of
the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system in railway
travelling; and sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights out. Some time
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room. It sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every moment. He got up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the time. It was exactly one o'clock. He was quite calm, and his
pulse, which not at all feverish. The strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the of footsteps. He put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, opened
the door. Right in front of him he saw, the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really must on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines. I shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to
supply you with more, should you require it." With words the
United States Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and,
closing his door, to rest.

For a moment Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a
ghastly green light. Just, however, as he reached the top of great
oak staircase, a door was flung open, little white-robed figures
appeared, and a large whizzed past his head!