-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in the “have no outline, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of restless
and unsatisfied activity, his buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He the manner
of Wilkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he combined with of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in his early stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulous
care could compensate for the exuberance of first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
reader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier of a similar kind, which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of apoplexy.”  We may think the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are in best vein of humour.  “The
Billickin,” on the other hand, lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out reason; and Dickens, always at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is studied from the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers. Yet, when he in June, 1870, leaving
three still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been to decipher purpose,
especially his intentions as to hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By coincidence, in September, 1869, Dickens was over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.” We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things that, but for strong
restraining power of his common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed to analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but responsible for none of my theories.

                                                          ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ is necessary to
obtain clear view of the characters in the tale, and of their relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old college companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whom he was the father of one child, a
daughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the children, Rosa and Edwin, then
expired, when the orphans were about and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, had been love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was annuity producing a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the of
opium smoking. He began very early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she took to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium ten
years (the exact period not stated), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  He her aware of his passion,
silently, and fears and detests him, but these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he perhaps does love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, and by the gossip their
betrothal.  “The bloom is off the plum” of their loves, he
says his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of this fact; comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into frightful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he not under opium.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between Chinaman, a Lascar, and hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by hag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over bright boy,” a lively lad,
full of chaff, but also full of confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin admits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes his life; and that the singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  This “agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding tenderness, does not understand.

In the scene we meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’s shows Edwin as lad
with bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass, auctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absurd epitaph
for his late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault some in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipated,