-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has been clearly shown that those
historical writings which are not in the Pentateuch are included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I should be
better pleased to meet an opponent than the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may startle some, I am prepared, after the most careful
deliberation, to affirm that I cannot separate them from the word of God
without at the same time abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Himself in His own teaching
has most distinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, while men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manna, the
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, describing their testimony as
more worthy of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad seal and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mental bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of internal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
     Women are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of the Nerves at the same
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Depression of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition whereby they favour any Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the condition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Nature, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Perversion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     throwing the whole nervous System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our stations. One may well imagine our consternation on awaking one
morning about the end of the second week to find the following notice
posted throughout all our quarters:
    All teachers not assigned to the city of Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
       

This is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In the first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call the Hypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver,
and other parts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarce knows one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
students, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is also
impossible to trace to a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevalent physiological symptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusements, a love of solitude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and