-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the condition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Nature, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Perversion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     throwing the whole nervous System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and physicians who prescribed popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powders, and
James's fever-powders--as universal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medicine must be directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
destruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no mercurial, no martial
preparation must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). However scientifically correct Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objecting so strongly to them. Less
eccentric was his allegiance to the "Ancients" rather than to the
"Moderns" so far as chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
by chemical rearrangement) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in the search; and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and what we are to fear" (p. 24).

Still more idiosyncratic, perhaps, is Hill's contention (p. 25) that the
air of dry, high grounds worsens the condition of the patient. Virtually
every writer I have read on the subject believed that onset of the hyp
was caused by one of the six non-naturals--air, diet, lack of sufficient
sleep, too little or too much exercise, defective evacuation, the
passions of the mind; and although some medical writers emphasized the
last of these, few would have concurred with Hill that the fetid air
of London was less harmful than the clearer air at Highgate. All readers
of the novel of the period will recall the hypochondriacal Matt
Bramble's tirade against the stench of London air. Beliefs of the
variety here mentioned cause me to question Hill's importance in the
history of medicine; there can be no question about his contributions to
the advancement of the science of botany through popularization of
Linnaeus' system of bisexual classification, but Hill's medical
importance is summarized best as that of a compiler. His recommendation
of the study of botany as a cure for melancholics is sensible but verges
on becoming "a digression in praise of the author," a poetic apologia
pro vita sua in Augustan fashion:
     For me, I should advise above all other things the study of nature.

     Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things; even of
     the utility we are seeking here. This will induce him to walk; and
     every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket, will
     afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
     the air; and continually to change the nature and quality of the
     air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, the heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be
     abroad; and the unceasing variety of the subjects of his
     observation, will prevent his walking hastily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means of his recovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill was forever extolling the claims of a life devoted to the study of
nature, as we see in a late work, The Virtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversion as a cure and more on
the botanic attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every foot-path
side, and thicket."

While Hill's rules and regulations regarding proper diet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Cheyne's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recommendation (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac patient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much space to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extolling this plant, a word should be said about it.

Throughout his life he was an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writer though he was, it was ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made abundantly clear in his correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whether in the small house in St. James's Street or in the
larger one on the Bayswater Road--he cultivated an herb garden that
flattered his knowledge and ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpieces of London. His arrogant
personality alone prevented him from becoming the first Keeper of the
Apothecary's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendent to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardens at Kensington
Palace and at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; over the years Hill produced more than thirty botanical
works, many of them devoted to the medical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbal (1756), On the
Virtues of Sage in Lengthening Human Life (1763), Centaury, the Great
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curing Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising that he
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
medical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authority for
the herbal pacification