-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softened the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which was the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted is in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road take by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lie one night and held counsel, made
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they do, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this was done than by rode over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheel out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to raced
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist is heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greet us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we have a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, woulded
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, is something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I thought, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we have to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We come to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows pass. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and cluster chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rest there say
that an old fountain had stand in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travel the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazed, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'Thatwas the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she point to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheel. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stared. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we draw up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men am smoked their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray begin to ring. One by one the older loungers knock the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they leave the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reached a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot throw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretch along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and am standing in their small gardens. When they see
the sketch-book they pose as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobble down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it is as well
we do not heard what she said, for I think she is cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
look like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheel out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, am on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must found shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lay beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sing. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they have just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to made
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters was nearly empty at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcome in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts would rather lose a few
shillings than let their children went to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and coulded scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lag behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags throw over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, have brought a push-cart; when we see it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were slept in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we come to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sit upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I should never forgot the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turn and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face woulded have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I coulded now understand why honest countrywomen keep
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as Béranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'Thatwas right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and tear man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walked with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party add; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others join with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reach our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which was good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men am ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretch as far as the eye could saw. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships am at
anchor, and steamers am steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melted into a soft purple
mist hung over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could was seen from afar, while
they bring out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came to one or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and a clock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glories, and the trees throw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the air was sweet with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend was not a very striking place as you entered it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, which hithertoed
we had know only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rest to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the private bar, and
saw we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who wait on us
is friendly too, and while J. was busy put away the tricycle she was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in the house, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of work for one woman to do, ma'am,' she go on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always am in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to a public, but to
got from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye is upon me I have an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of the instruments decree from
all time to worked out her cheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk is moor opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to looked through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stand on the
pier, after we have dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boats turned with it. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurled their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the houses build on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly to the coastguard boat, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distance from the pier, we coulded see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars moved to and froed on the decks. The river was now as
lively as it had before been quiet. But it monopolise the activity of the
place, for when we go back for our tricycle we met only one or two
seamen and a handful of children.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us returned to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to looked at us, could
stimulate us into speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seem to took us to task for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face it said--
  'Be quick: your time's short!'

But we know better. Rochester was but seven miles off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps have grown as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretended to struggle with their laziness. All
along the road we saw them lying under the hedges and in shady places.

Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhat, and am making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindle
a fire by the wayside, and hang their kettle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond is a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to it a large
farmhouse, with red roof and walls, whose colour was softened and
harmonise by time. When the children saw we had stop the machine they
ran up at once to beg us to bought queer little round calico-balls, which
they call pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfit by our refusal of the balls, danced merrily around the
tricycle. Then she peer into J.'s sketch-book.

'He's drawrin!' she call to her mother, in a loud stage whisper.

The latter bade her mind her manners. But she still continue her
observations.

'Oh, mother, itwas the church!' was her next cry.

'Which, I'm sure, itwas a werry decent church,' the mother declare, as if
to encouraged us with her approval; and then they went their way.

Later, when, as we were coasted down a hill, we overtook the party, the
same child jumped and clap her hands, 'It's goin' all by its lone
self!' she screamed; but her sister trudged stolidly on, and spake never a
word.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury, made famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few was better known and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valour, and where Charles Dickens
spend the last years of his life. We had counted upon made it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just then drifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashion, our feet moving mechanically, or whether
the prospect of another long coast made us forgetful of all else, certain
it is that, with a glance of admiration at the dark spread cedars, and
another at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as to where we were.