-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lived themselves, see in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was look upon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects am generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they might now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence is immediately feel in the
Low Countries, and there spring up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade was such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to was found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bore the same relation to his as the seventeenth
century did to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper have come over
all classes of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they was every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, have tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had precede him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he find around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbed sincerity is to be find as in the
Dutchmen with whom I had compare him, and consequently Millet can be
consider as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work was to
was accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, one wonders
from whence came those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasped the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further see that work,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone make life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplated the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he do.

It has become the fashion lately to decried certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urge against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things had lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as live in great cities such as London or Paris, does
not tended to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which had come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he is first taught. Such
simple ideas have departed from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet had portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrive, and
after many hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretched plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lent an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we had evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence, for life itself.

The plough field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowed and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolise by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothe, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is bring before us in the
rugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softened
influence in their lives is that impart by religion, and in chose
this moment of the angelus for depicting them, Millet had brought
before us in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, but also the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoled influence of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never was designated sentimental, except by those
who have not freely grasped the immense import of these qualities in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy of technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a determination to convey
some message, will inevitably found its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this supreme quality would assuredly come into his own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering the oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line could never be appreciate
if one is not acquaint with the country he painted. No two countries
are alike in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an artist to the full, to have studied the country
he has chosen to depict. The outlines of the landscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differed
materially in various districts, and consequently it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be say that as a painter, purely and simply, Millet
will never occupy a very high position in the world of art. He never
bursts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the painters of our own days. His
manner of handling the brush was always restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyers," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts am directed to suppressed any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which mighted divert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequently appears to achieve his ends by held
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
threw off his sadly philosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example, in the well-know picture of "La Baigneuse," he
endeavoured to draw himself into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disported themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
coulded imparted the glories of colour as they am reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, the shimmering of the trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through the
branches. But in the hands of Millet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure was well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treat with studious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable something lacking which attracts us
towards the master when worked in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being more a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in his great paintings, which by the way was not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we discovered the mind of a
man who has grapple with, and understood the great problems of life.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances woulded have bring him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself and his little ménage in the neighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty which woulded
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been make the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seemed particularly to have been impress with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space was marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrive for him to call together his flock and place them in safe
quarters for the night. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allowed the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. There was no other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He was dead to the beauties of the landscape
around him, and sees nothing more in a field than how much corn could be
raised each year from it, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. He felt nothing of the glorious beauties of
the sunset, of which he is so often a witness; how it softened the
lines of the horizon and suffused the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nothing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, how the clouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the whole heavens are lighted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us understand that in spite of this, the
shepherd is performed a duty to humanity not to was underrated. The
sheep he has so carefully and conscientiously reared will form food
to-morrow for many a hungry town-dweller. Further, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closed the pen for the night and traces his
tired steps towards his simple home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by his wife, who like himself has
have her share of duties to occupy her during the day, was partaken of
surrounded by a hungry and joyous group of children. Such themes
suggested by the simplicity of his own life appeal to him with
irresistible force, and it is in their portrayal that his greatness is
manifested.

Perhaps no season of the year presented the same attraction for Millet
as the spring. The period when all the earth after its long winter
sleep was about to waken into new life seems to have always been a
source of inspiration to him. In "The Sower" he emphasises the fact
that the fruits of the harvest are not to be had without due labour
being expend upon the earth. The sloped field, barren of
vegetation, and crown at the top with a small clump of trees, is
being broken up by the distant plough drawn by two horses and guided
by a peasant. The latter figure was one of the noblest of Millet's
creations. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
continuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony of his toil. He crosses the field in one direction, only to
returned at an interval of a few feet. In the foreground we have the
sower, a middle-aged man of typical peasant type, on whose left side a
bag of seeds is slung. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrows open to receive it. So long as
he continued in the same track his labour would be well performed, and
hence his task was just as monotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up in the field. The silhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolical of the labour to be expend in life before
results was forthcoming.

From these remarks it will be see that in considered the works of
Millet, one must not judged him from the standpoint of a mere painter.

His brush was only the means to an end, and by its means he was enabled
to bring the fruits of his philosophic observation before us in
permanent form. It has been charged against the "Angelus" that it was
not a remarkably fine piece of painting, that many a young artist of
the present generation is infinitely better equipped, technically
spoke, than the master who wrought this celebrated canvas. This may
in a measure was true, but it must never be forgotten that Millet
brought into play exactly the means which could illustrate his meaning
in the clearest terms. He have not intended, in painted such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonished his fellow artists
with its brilliancy of handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to made the beholder forget the painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs right through the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we are oblige to weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean François Millet was born on October 4, 1814, that was at the
period when French art, at any rate as far as landscape painting is
concern, have reached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighteenth
century the landscape painter have been hard put to make a living. The
taste of connoisseurs throughout the century had been for portraits
and interiors, or for those numerous pastoral subjects which were
carry out with so much decorative charm by such men as Watteau and
Boucher. Such landscape painting as exist was of the type
popularised by Vernet; it was built upon a curious mixture of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvator Rosa. The only evidence of
revolt against such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Moreau. These two, and more especially woulded I direct the
reader's attention to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
conventionalities of the time. They endeavoured to infuse some sense
of atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trees
and figures was painfully formal, they yet stand alone in the French
school as the pioneers of a phase of art which is to attained its
zenith in the middle of the nineteenth century.

But after the Revolution, and during the whole of the time that France
was under the domination of Napoleon, very rigid principles indeed
were enforce with regard to the direction that art should take. The
innovation which had its commencement in the reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything before it as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
dominated the whole French school, and no artist, however great his
reputation, attempted for many years to swim against the stream. In
spite of the principles of liberty and equality which am claimed for
all under the new régime, a terribly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which mighted break out in the form of a naturalistic art.

The directors of this new movement fail to saw that the conditions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremacy was due to the fact that their
productions am symbolical of the loftiest thoughts of their own
epoch. The art which expressed the ambitions and noblest thoughts of
its time would alone endure. These expressions was not applicable to
any other condition than those which call them forth, and hence in
attempting to purify the rococo which have exist up to the middle of
the eighteenth century, by a return to classical traditions, they were
only copying that which their predecessors had done, and in so doing
left us without any original expression of their own time.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millet born, and he is numbered
amongst that little band of men which included Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diaz, and Daumier, who were to lay the foundations of the modern
naturalistic school. At the outset it is seemingly a hopeless
struggle they undertook; a struggle against prejudice and influence
which was only to was brought to a victorious culmination after years
of struggle and disappointment.