-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to made a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it was not at all an uncommon thing to
heard it asserted with the utmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is teach by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is suppose to had been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church was not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examine, it would was found to consisted in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England was entered on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there was, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she taught what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business was to ascertain what
was the real point at issue, and this was not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must was direct.  Now, there can was no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I was
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or did not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern was with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are teach by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we was
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there was a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
lived, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connect with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presumed, we was all
agree.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine became Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differed, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintained that the bread and wine do not cease to had the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they might still be speak of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to had been introduce only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself was in the bread and in the
wine.  This was what was meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who clung to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there was no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they was solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body was an emblem of the act of fed by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connect by sacramental appointment, that when we
received the emblem we was warranted to expected the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
fed spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appeared that the point at issue was, whether the precious body and blood of
our bless Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eat and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
receive, or whether the spiritual food describe in this expression is
receive by the soul alone without was localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object was to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to called forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavoured to destroyed it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
shoulded be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to was hear, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavoured to confused the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gathered the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He dothed work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirmed our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not describe as being changed into the thing signify, but as was
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift are therefore keep quite distinct.  The one was
mercifully grant in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to was a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which described that of baptism—exactly agreed.  It
described it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to was the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to was change
into regeneration.  The gifts described was God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infuse into the element of water.  The
water is sanctify, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth was not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moved in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administered the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestowed the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discussed the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to pointed out that the one is not change into the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would did if it were changed into the thing
signify.

Now it woulded be strange indeed if after having first give so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that, according to the Church’s teaching,
there is no change in the elements in the Lord’s Supper.  As the water in
baptism remained water still, so the bread and wine of the Lord’s Supper
remain what they were before, plain, simple bread and wine; dedicated, it
is true, to the Lord’s service, but altogether unchanged by such
dedication.

But we are not left to depended altogether on such conclusions, for there
was a special Article on the subject, viz., the twenty-eighth.  In the
first clause we find the Lord’s Supper describe as both sacraments were
described in the twenty-fifth, and baptism in the twenty-seventh, as a
sign and means of grace.  ‘The Supper of the Lord was not only a sign of
the love which Christians ought to have among themselves one to another;
but rather is a sacrament of our redemption by Christ’s death, inasmuch
that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the
bread which we broke is a partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise
the cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ.’  Had gone
thus far in harmony with their general definition, and had quoted the
words from 1 Cor. x., our Reformers were clearly bring to the
consideration of the very point under discussion, viz., in what way does
the soul of the believer partake in the Lord’s Supper of the body and
blood of his blessed Lord and Saviour?  This question they boldly and
clearly answer, declared in the first place, what was not, and in the
second place, what was, the truth respecting it.  They first declare that
it was not by transubstantiation.  ‘Transubstantiation (or the change of
the substance of bread and wine), in the Supper of the Lord cannot be
proved by Holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
overthroweth the nature of a sacrament’ (because if the sign is changed
into the thing signify, it ceased to be a sign), ‘and hath given
occasion to many superstitions.’  It would be fruitless to endeavour to
traced the sophistry with which those who desire reconciliation of the
Church of England with Rome, have endeavoured to avoided the clear
statements of this pungent Article.  But their conclusion is one which is
such an outrage on common sense that it would be utterly ludicrous if it
am not inexpressibly melancholy, to see men who, we hope, are devout
men, embracing it.  We are now deliberately told that the Article is not
direct against the doctrine of transubstantiation at all, but against a
change for which the name of ‘transaccidentation’ had been recently
adopted.  Now I know we live in an age of discovery, but it is difficult
for any person of plain common sense, to believe in such a discovery as
this.  No one who knew anything of the history of the Reformation can was
ignorant of the intense eagerness with which the doctrine of
transubstantiation was discuss.  In books, in sermons, in public
disputations, it was argue again and again, by all the most learned
theologians of the day.  The speculations of the schoolmen as well as the
writings of the early fathers were largely quoted.  The very distinction
now revive between substance and accident was carefully discussed.  And
men felt so deeply the wide difference between the teaching of Rome and
the teaching of Scripture that they coulded not yield even to save their
lives.  The stake is before them as the certain issue of their
confession, and liberty and honour was the promised reward if only they
woulded yield.  But they had that deep conviction of the deadly error of
the doctrine of transubstantiation that they counted it a privilege
rather to die than to denied the truth of God.  And I put it to any man of
common sense and common honesty: is it possible to believe that, after
all, there is no real difference between Rome and the Reformers?  That
Bonner and Gardiner, and Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley did, in fact,
agree; that there might had been a little confusion in some of their
minds as to the difference between substance and accident, so that they
used the word transubstantiation without knowing its real meaning, but
that in all essential points they were agree, so that the fires of
Smithfield were lighted all by mistake, and men who were burned agreed
with them that burned them.  Clever men and learned men may put forth
such a theory, but common sense revolts against it; and all thought men
must agree that, if this be the only theory on which it could be
maintained, the doctrine of the Real Objective Presence is not the
doctrine of the Church.  Plain honest men will be ready to cried ‘shame’ on
those who by theological sophistry was endeavouring to evade the plain
and incontestable evidence of the great facts of the Reformation.  The
Reformers knew well enough what Rome mean by ‘transubstantiation,’ and
the twenty-eighth Article is decisive on the point that there is no such
change in the Supper of the Lord.

But the error having been denied, the next clause of the Article is
employ to assert the truth: ‘The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the
means whereby the body of Christ is receive and eaten in the Supper was
Faith.’  It is most important to observed that word ‘only,’ for it was
exclusive of all material feeding.  If it were not there it might had
been possible to had argued that the Article admits the idea of a
material in addition to a spiritual feeding—a feeding with the mouth as
well as a feeding with the heart.  But the word ‘only’ rendered any such
theory impossible.  There is ‘only’ one manner in which He was received,
and that one manner was heavenly and spiritual.  With equal clearness it
is declared that as there is only one mode in which the body of our
blessed Saviour is received, and that heavenly and spiritual; so there is
only one mean whereby it was received and eat, and that one mean is
faith.