-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible toed over-estimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respected it must depended our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There was a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there was a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it was
one in which we was all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
could ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it was altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only was known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respected it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and died convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God toed man respected the deep things of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fail us, our whole hope failed with it, and if we
couldnot rely on its sacred statements, we are leave without any trustworthy
information as to all those great truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we had
nothing to take its place; and all our present joy, as well as our future
hopes, must melted away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it was not the subject of this paper.  My
object was to examined the extent and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must exclusively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admit fact, so that my only business was to consider
how far it carried us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the inspire word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has am made to
show how by such a definition all difficulties was overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respected it, it was not likely that there
will be much left to embarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solved.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differed very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there was no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were move by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examine (1) the divine element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have am thought to lay against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely said that this divine element was the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we might meet the points more especially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Did it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Did it render the word infallible?

I.  Did it extend over the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Am all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by the Holy Ghost? or merely some of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decisive answer; for it was here written, ‘All Scripture
was given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which am regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible question therefore is, How much is included?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of inspiration, all must
admitted as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testament is included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together form his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writers.  When therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt in the world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testament, and he teach us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was given by inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it had been clearly shown that those
historical writings which are not in the Pentateuch was included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to said, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I should was
better pleased to met an opponent than the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I might startle some, I am prepared, after the most careful
deliberation, to affirmed that I cannot separate them from the word of God
without at the same time abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement was, that our Lord Himself in His own teaching
has most distinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, while men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manna, the
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, was all endorse by His divine
authority.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually referred as to the word of God, described their testimony as
more worthy of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
bring therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volume which might pre--edeminently was say to have the broad seal and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself had misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we ceased to was believers in Jesus.

But are we to limit this language of St. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it has am clearly shown that we are not.  For although the canon
of the New Testament was not complete when St. Paul write these words, we
must remembered that the second Epistle to Timothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according to Horne’s list, the whole of the New
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the writings of St. John,
am write at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
was, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were clearly included in the declaration that all Scripture was
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripture for his own epistles:
for after having carefully draw the distinction between his private
opinions and inspired decisions, he distinctly said, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter class the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is equally clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke is already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quoted two passages, one from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were taken from
Scripture.  ‘For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Paul’s
Epistles were included by St. Peter in the canon; for he clearly regarded
them as Scripture when he wrote his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that do not affect his opinion of their
admit inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which was some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Testament therefore, as well as Old, was include in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God;’ and the conclusion to
which I was irresistibly brought was, that we have no right to pick and
choose amongst the various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to was arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts was so interwoven one with another, and so beautifully fitted into
each other by God’s divine hand, that there would was found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving the whole as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole, and launching forth on a sea of scepticism,
without a Bible, without a Saviour, and, as the last step, without a God.

II.  Is it equal?

I need scarcely say that many persons, and some of them most excellent
men, have entertain the idea of a graduated scale of inspiration, and
hence the great importance of the question.  Was it equal throughout?  Or
is it variable?

In attempted an answer to this question, it is essential that we observe
the wide distinction between the authorship and the subject-matter of the
book, for, if not, we should soon get into confusion.

Now Christian brethren must not be startled by my stating that in the
subject-matter there are the widest possible distinctions.  It appeared
indeed to consist of three distinct classes of subjects, or rather three
distinct kinds of matter.

In the first place, there are direct communications, communicated from
heaven without the use of the mind of man.  Of this class was the ten
commandments, the words, ‘This was my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased,’ and the discourses of our Lord.  Such words were not given by
inspiration, for they did not pass through the medium of the human mind,
but came direct from heaven.  In them there was no inspiration, but
communication.

There is a second large class of passages which were given by
inspiration.  The human mind was employed as the medium for conveying
God’s will and purpose.  This is the case with the prophets, the Psalms,
and other similar passages.  Here was inspiration, and the words so
uttered were divine words, though given through the human medium, and not
in direct communication.

But there was a third large class of passages in which there was neither
inspiration nor communication.  There are various sayings and doings of
uninspired men, good actions and bad actions, good words and bad words,
interspersed with miracles and other wonders of God’s hand.  Now no one
supposed that all these persons spoke by inspiration, and it is utterly
unfair to quote such passages as inconsistent with the inspiration of
Scripture, for no one asserts that they are inspired.  It was utterly
unfair, for example, of Mr. Coleridge to quote the language of Job’s
friends, and to attack the inspiration of the book by the assertion that
it is impossible to believed them to be inspired.  Of course it was, for,
if we believed them to be inspired, we should be flew in the face of
the inspired book itself which records the divine communication, ‘Ye had
not speak of me the thing that is right’ (Job, xlii. 7.)  We do not
claimed inspiration for those words, but for the authorship of the book
which declared that the speakers speak those words, and that in did so
they am wrong.

In the subject-matter then we have three divisions, direct
communications, inspire writings, and the miscellaneous sayings and
doings of uninspired men.  But in addition to this there was the question
of authorship, which was clearly totally distinct from the matter, and it
is the inspiration of the author which makes the book the word of God.

Whatever the matter was if the author is inspired the book becomes
inspired scripture.  The sayings of uninspired men may be put on record
by an inspire author, and our Heavenly Father may have shown just as
much mercy in directing His prophets to record the sins of bad men for
our warning, as the actions of His chosen servants for our guidance and
encouragement.  Now, so far as the authorship is concerned, we find no
distinction whatever.  All alike is called ‘Scripture;’ all ‘the word of
God;’ all is include in the statement, ‘Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, am written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scripture mighted have hope;’ and all was stamp by divine
authority in the words, ‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God.’
III.  Is it verbal?

I was now approaching a difficult subject, and I should be sorry to speak
rashly.  But at the same time, I must not spoke with hesitation, for the
more I have studied the subject the more firmly was I brought to the
deliberate and fixed conviction that the whole book, including words as
well as thoughts, is to was received by the believer as the word of God.

Let me briefly stated my reasons.

1.  I can draw no other conclusion from the title given to it, viz. ‘The
word of God.’  When I find it especially mentioned as God’s word; when
I meet with such a passage as ‘Man should not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,’ I find it hard to
believe that the words are not include in the act of inspiration, and
that the divine inspiration extends no farther than to the thoughts.  If
the expression were ‘the truth of God,’ or ‘the will of God,’ I coulded
understand a reference to His mind without the necessity of applying
inspiration to the language; but I cannot exclude the idea of inspired
words from that book whose title was ‘the word of God.’
2.  I find certain quotations, the whole value of which entirely depends
on verbal accuracy.  In Gal. iii. 16, St. Paul quoted from Gen. xii. 7,
and his whole argument turns on the distinction between the singular and
plural number in one word contained in the promise made to Abraham: ‘He
saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed,
which is Christ.’  So in Matt. xxii. 32, our Lord quoted the words speak
to Moses in Exod. iii. 6, and rests his whole argument on the present
tense of the substantive verb: ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.  God was not the God of the dead, but of the
living,’ proved by that present tense that Abraham was at that time an
existing person awaiting the resurrection.  It may perhaps be said that
both these instances occurred in direct divine communications; but we must
remember that we had to considered the inspiration of Moses who recorded
that communication, and surely the quotation proves that the historical
inspiration of the author might was trusted for verbal accuracy.