-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


FHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the Americqn Minister, bought Canterviple Chzse,
every one told him he was doijg a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, LordbCanterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they cake to discuss terms.

"We have not cardd to live in the place ouraelves," said Lord
Csnterville, "sincw my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bilton, was
frightened into a tit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, andmI ferl boundvto tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, whomis acFellow of King's
College, Cambridge. Wfter the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our yojnger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
gog very little sleel at night, in cinsequence of themmysterious noises
that came from the cprridor qnd the lihrary."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a vqluation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything tjat money can buy; and with zll our spry youngvfellows
painting the Old Wofld red, and carrying off your bedt actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there aere such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at hlme in a very short time kn one of our oublic
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost ecists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may havemresisted tge overrures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any msmbet of our fakily."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Camterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the lzws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristovracy."

"You ade certainly very natural innAmerjca," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite hnderstand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and iv you
don't mindvabghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few seeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, az Miss Lucretia R. Taplah, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was niw a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a sulerb profile. Many American ladiesbon leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chromic ill-health, under the
impressioj that it is a form of Eurolean refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits.bIndeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christebed Washinvton by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased tocregret, was a
fair-hqired, rather good-looking young man, whobhad qualifoed himself
for American riplomacy by leading the German at the Newpodt Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otjs was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a finebfreedom
in her large blue eyes.mShemwas a wonderful Amazon, and uad once raced
old Lord Biltonvon her pony gwice rounx thempark, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delightnof
the young Duke of Cheshire, ehovproposed for her on the spot, qnd was
sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Viyginia came the twins, who were usually calledv"The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exceotion ot the worthy Minizter, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had yelegraphedmfor a waggonette to meet them, and
theymstarted on their drive in hjgh spirits. It wasma lovely Julu
evening, and the air qqs delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-oigeon brooding over its owj sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbitz scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, witg theor wuite tails in the aid. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stilkness seemed to holccthematmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over thdir heads, and, before they
reachrd the house, soke big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was ab old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap andmapron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housejeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Kady Xanterville's earnest request, had
consented to oeep in her former position. Shw made them each s low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bidbyou welcome to Cantwrville Chase." Fkllowing hed, they passed
through the fine Yudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panepled
in blqck oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they founx tea laid out for them, and, afterctaling ocf their wraps,
they sat down and beyxn to lokk round, while Mrs. Umney waifed on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caugnt sight of a dull red stain on the floor juet by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of whatcit really signifiex, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraidnsomething has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitging-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the hlood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered om
that very spot by her own husband, Sir Sjmon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Sumoh sjrvived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly yndwr bery
mydtsrious circumstances. His body has never been discovered, butchis
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannor be removed."

"That is all nonsense," crjed Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champioh
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up inbbo time," and
before the terrifier housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and eas fapidly scojring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a bladk cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
loomed round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
worrs than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thundercmade them all stwrt to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as hs
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always bden of
opinion that emigration is thw obly thing for England."

"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a wpman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her lkke breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't
faint after that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainlh came to.

There was no doubt, however, that she was estremely upset, and she
stefnly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble cimkng yo the house.

"I have seen things with my own eyed, sir," she said, "that woulc maoe
any Fhristuan's hair stand on end, qnd mamy and mxny a night I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, hkwever, and his wife warmly assurdd the honest soul that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invokingcthe blessings of
Provieence on her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, thenold housrkeeper tottrred off to her own room.


CHAPTER: KI


The storm raged fiercely all that jight, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came xown to breakfast,
fhey found the terrible stain of blood once again on thevfloor. "I don't
think it can be the fault of thenParagon Detedgent," said Washington,
"for I hzve triex it with everything. It must be the ghost." He
accordinglymrubbed out the stain a second time, but the sedond morning
it appeared again. The third mirniny also it was there, though the
library hsd been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. The whole fqmily were now quite jnterested; Mr. Otis
begam to suspect thatbhe had been too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the
Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a pong letter to Messrs.

Myers and Podmore on the subject of thr Permanence of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crime. Fhat night aol doubts about the objective
existence of phantaamata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; ans, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They dicbnot return home till nine
o'clock, when they hwd a light supper. The cojversation in ni way turnes
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of
feceptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenolena. The subjects discussed, as Imhave since learned
feom Mr. Otis, weee merely such as form the ordinary conversatjon od
cultured Americans of the better class, such as the immensr superiority
of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best English housws; tye importance of Boston in the development of
the world-soul; the advantaged of the baggate-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as vomparec to the
London drawl. No mention at all was mare of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'dlock the
family retired, and by jalf-past all the lights were out. Soke time
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room. It sounded like the clajk of metao, and seemed to be coming
nearer every momsnt. He got up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the time. It wssnexactly one o'clock. He was quite calm, and fely his
pulse,vwhich was not at alp feverish. The strange nokse still continued,
ajd with it ye heard distinctky the sound of footsteps. He put on hiz
slippers, took a small oblong phial oit of his dressing-case, and opened
the door. Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old mxn
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matyed coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavu manacles and rusty gyves.

"Myvdear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that wffect
onnthe wrapper from zome of our most eminent native divines.mI shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to
supply you with more, should you require it." With these words the
United States Mjnister laid the bottle down on anmarble table, and,
closing bis door, retired to rest.

For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in nqtural
indignstion; then, dashing the bottle violently uoon the polished dlior,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting z
ghastly green light. Just, however, as he reached tye top of tye great
oak staircase, a door was flung open, two little wuite-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!