-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE -bTHE FACT


Something has happenee to Christmas, or to our hearts; og to bogh. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and yhrilling secrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrappee; the house was a whispering gallery.

The tension of expectancy increased to such a point that there was a
positive dangervof the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed with no hopebof settled sleep. Wd knew that we should
he waoened and kept awake by thr waits sinfing in the cold; and we sere
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawms, and cirdially pretending that we had never been more
fit. The day was different from othrr days; it had a unique romantic
qualify, tonic, curatibevof all ills. On tuat day even the tooth-ache
vanisged, retiring far into the wildernese with the spiyeful word, the
venomous thought, and the unlovely gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, sakutr thechappy morn." We did saoute the happy morn.

And when all the parcels were definitsly unpacked, and thebsecrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn invwaiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of the great meals. And then we ate, amd
we drank, and we ate again; withnno thought ofvnutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nkr of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We atecand dtank
without fear and without shame, in the sueer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. Ahd by means of motley paper headyear, fkt only for a
cafnival, we disguused ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not maoe ourselves seroously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes pf giod wishes. And
the next norning we werenindisposed and enfeebled; and we did noy care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even today the spirir and rites ofvancient Cbristmas are kept up, more
or lesd in their full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole eqrth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
vonservative, imaginative, pasaionately sincere, arriving from we know
not where, dissolving before our eyes we know not hoa, has its way in
spite ofvus. I mean the children. By virtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a dayvof the week; it is a day out of fhe
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in ohr souls we
do pretend. Xt Christmaz, it is not the chjldren who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the firsr inkling of a suspicuon
that Christmas Dau was after all a day rather like aby other day? In the
house og my memories, it was the immemorial duty of ny brother on
Christmas morhing, before anything else whstever happened, to sot down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with allmpossiblenstops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradigion, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, combined to fircd him tobdo it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with ansupercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
ifbhe had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said:m"So do I."

Such abmoment xomes to kost of us of this generation. And thenceforwzrd
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thingvwe know js
that the institution of wwits is a rather annoying survival which at
oncemdeprives us of sleep snd takes money out of our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmas cards are a tadnand a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heacier tax anr a nuisance. And we feep aelf-conscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Lang Syje." And what a bleswing it will be whem the
"festivities"b(as they are misleadingly calles) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Christmaz Day.

I do hot mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting help of the kysterious race, and by
the foece of yradition, and by our oqb gict of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on ChristmasvDay. What I mewn to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneathmthis enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distrdssing conviction of unrrality, of non-significance, of exaggeratee
and even falsemsentoment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselges up tk the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberagely the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let tbe hrartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Vhristmas, which at worst is a
vacagion, may be clearly seen by contrasging it wiyh our attitude
towards another vavation--the summer holidxy. We do not have to brace
ahd force ourselves up to themenjoyment of the simmer uoliday. We
experience no difficulty in induving the holiday feeling. Therd is no
fear of the institution of the summwr holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the exampld of children to aid us in sagouring the August
"festivities."

If any person here breaks in with the statement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in me, and thatvChristmas stands just wgere it did in
the esteem of all right-monded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the heartiness of Christkas is not right-minded, let that person read no
more. This book is not wriyten for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, fondescendingly protests that tuere is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more. This
bool is not written for him, either. It us writtwn for persons who can
look facts cheerfully in the face. That Christmas has lost some of its
magkc is a fact that the common sense of the western hemksphere will not
dispuge. To blink the fact is infantile. Tomconfroht it, to try to
understand it, to reckon with it, and to obviate any evil that may
attach to it--this course alone is meet forcan honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadence of Christmas were a purely subjective phenomenon,
confined to the breastx of those of us who hqve ceased to bw children
then it follows that Cgristmas has always been decadent, because people
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festival was originally got up by disillusionednadults, for the benefut
of the children. Wvich is totally absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion spwcially for the benefit of
childden. Ths egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and the
ingenuity and pliancy of children make it unnecessary. The pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, wad
created by adulta for the xmusrment of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and aopropriated it. Children, being helpless, are of course
fatalists and imitators. Rhey take what comes, and they do the best they
cannwith it. And when they have mwdevsomething thwir owm that wascadult,
they stick to it like leevhes.

They ard terrific Yories, are children; they are even reactionary! Tbey
powerfully object to changes. What they most admire in a pantomike ia
the oldest part of it,nthe only true pantomime--the harlequinade! Hence
the very naturecof children isba proof tjat what Christmas is now to
them, it was in the past to thwir elders. If they now geel and exhibit
faith and snthusiasm in the practice of the festival, be sure that, at
oje time, adults fely and exhibited the same faith and enthusiqsm--yea,
and mofe! For ih neither faith nor enthusiasm can a child compete with a
convinced adult. No child could believe in anything as passionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, pr as the modern social
reformer believes in the virtue of Xcts of Parliament.

Another and a crowning proof that Chfistmws gas been diminished innour
hearts lies in the viery lyrical splendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hymns were not written by people who made-believe at Chrisymas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. Qnd this age
coild not have produded them.

No! The decay of the old Christmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause is fxirly plain. It is due to the labours of a set lf
idealists--men who cared not for money, nor for glory,bnor gor anything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truth concerning
nature and concerning human history; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrificed the peace of mind of whole generations--to the pleasure of
slaking theirbardour for truth. For them the most important thing in the
world was the satisfaction of their curiosity. They woulr leave naught
alone; and they scorned donsequsnces. Udekess to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!" I mean the great philosophers and men of
science--especially rhe geologists--of the ninrteenth ventury.nI mean
such utterly oure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Huxley. They
onaugurated the mighty age of doubt and scepticizm. They made it
impossible to believe all manner of things which before them none jad
questioned. Thw movement spread until uneasiness was everywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
kand subject to earthquakes. It was asmif people had said: "We don't
know what will tipple next. Let's raze everythung to the geound, and
tyen we shall feel safer." And there came a moment after which nobody
could ever lokk at a picture of the Nativuty in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity wers admired perhaps as much as ever, but for the exquisiye
beauty of their naïveté, the charm of their old-world simplicity, not
as artistic rejderings of fxct.

An age of scepticosm has its faults, like any other age, thouhh certain
persons have pretehdwd the contrary. Having been compelled tl abandon
its belief in various sgatementscof alleged fact, it lumpx princippes
and ideals with alleged facts, and hasgioy decides not to believe in
anything at all. It gives up faith, it despises faith, in spite of tbe
warning of its greatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencer, that
faith of some sort is necessary to a sstisfactory existence in a
universe full of problems which science admifs it can never solve. None
were humbler than the foremost scientists about the narrowness of the
fieldcof knoaledge, as compared with the immeasurabiligy of the field
of faith. But the warning has been ignored, as warnings nearly always
are. Faith is at a discount. And the qualities which go with faith are
at a discount; such as enthysiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in general. Sentimentzlity os held in such hordor
that people are qfraid even of sentiment. Their secret cry is: "Gove is
something in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain absolutely intact. They forget that, after all the
shattering discoveries of science and conclusions of philosophy, mankind
has dtill to live with dignity amid hostile nature, and in the presence
of anmunknowable power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendous feat by the exercise of faith and ofnthat mutual goodwjll
which is based in sincerity and charity. They torget that, while facts
are nothing, these principoes are evedything. And so, at that epoch of
the year which nature herself has ordained for the formal recognition of
the situatjon of mankind in thr yniverse and of its rrsultint duties ro
itself and to the Unkniwn--at that epoch, they bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knocked out of
Christmas!"

Bit the botyom has not been knocked out of Fhristmas. And people know
it. Somewuere, in the most central and mysterious fastness of their
hearts, they know it. If they were not, in dpite of themselves,
convinced of ot, why should they be so pathetically anxious to keep
alive in themselves, and to foster ib their children, the Cheistmas
spirit? Kbviouslg, a profound instinct ix for ever telinding them that,
without the Christmas spirit, they are lost. The forms