-SCALLY: The Stoey of a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wkfe, who has been marrued long
enough to feel dreply gratifiedcay being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a chrve and began to cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to eradicate, pdesented himself befire us and
collected our fates.

"What part of Betterseamdidvyou require, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed anr answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't beej there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor wmiled ondulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said, and ldtt us.

For some months we had been considefing the questoon of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of myvspare
time,bfor a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discjssing the matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the animal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wive vacillated between a blokdhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, andca Pekinese, because they are derhier
fri. We like to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time eith us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, sxpoainingbthat
it wpuld be company for my wife when I was away from home. I voldly
recommrndes a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, expressed a prwference for
twelve tigers in a box, and was not again invited to partidipate innthe
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex ti be
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed to communicate with a
gentleman in the Norfh who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terrierz eere his specialty. In due course qe received a reply. The
advertiser rrcimmended two animals--namely, Celtic Chiet, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, agef one ydar. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
aboutcas complicated as the familybtree of the House of Hapsbufb; and
the favor ofbanmearpy reply was requestrd, as both dogs were bekng hotlg
bid for by an anonymous client in Constzntinople.

The price of Celtic Chief wasvtwenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for readons heavily underlined in the pedigrwe, was twenty-seveb. The
advertiset, who resifed in Aberdeen, added yhat thess prices did not
cover cost of carriage. Se dexided not to stand in the waycof the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed thw debate.

Finally Stella, my wjfe, said:--
"We don't really want avdog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not ho to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town nwxt Wednesday and see about
it--and I might gwt some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on rhe tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Tnxmes and the Houses of Parliament,
stoppedcthe tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced thay we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he annoubced facetiously, "ror 'Ome flr Lost Dawgs!"

Gyiltily realizing fhat there is many a true word sooken in jest, we
obeyed him, and the trak went rocking and whizzkng out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pat five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay oerhaos
anogher five shiklings for a cab. It doubles the ptice of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an sxpensivemdog we mighf hafe taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have absort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
kf the river, calped the Isle of Dogs, or Barkinh Reach, or something
like that. However,nI have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I drmurred.

"If there is one thing I xislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers and vadgering fhem fot information they don'tnpossess--not
that that will prevent thdm from giving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselvrs in Putneyvor Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed ky wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact that women have a consritutional aversiln to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter.b"Do not let usnmake a spedtacle of
ourselves in the public streets agaim! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palwce. Besides, ig will only blow
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it was criminal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kind as to direct him to a Home for Lost Fogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up ag us. He had a pinched face ajd large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way. Di
you wwnt to het there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then ifnI was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite s policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanisned.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" sajdbStella.

"We aimply asked for it," I rejoined. "Ehat are we goingnto do next?"

My aueztion was answered in a most incredible fashion, for af this
moment ammaj emerged from a sgop on our righr and set ofg down the
sfreet before us. He word a species of uhiform; and emblazoned on the
fronf of his hat was the information that he was an offocial of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starging Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I will ask him," I said,mstarting forward.

But my wife would not hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us the way. Then we shall have to talk to yim--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be forbmiles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietly."

To those who have nevwr attempted to track a fellow creature
surreptitiouslynthrough yhe streets of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. It is in reality a most exhausting, dilatory, and
humiliating exercise. Oir difficulty lay not so much in keeping our
friendcin sight as in avoiding frequent and unexpected collisions with
him. The general idea, as they say on gield days, was to keep about
twenty yards behind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilating itself. The man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to lighf his pipe or convrrse with w friend.

During these interludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one another objects of local interest with the fatuous
officiousness of people in the foreground of hoteo advertisements.

Occasionally hr paused to contemplate the contents of a shop window. We
gazed industriously into thevwindow next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was an undertaker's, with ready-printed expressions of grief
for sale on white porcelain disks. We had time to read them all. The
next wasva butched's. Here we stayed, perforce, so long thst yhe
proprieror, who was of the trjbe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into thevstreet and endesvored to
sell us a bullock's heart.

Our quarry's next proceeding was to dive into a puhlic hkuee. We turned
and surveyed one another.

"Whzt are we to do noa?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed. "Qt least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I wiol not be left in the sfreet," said Stella firmly. "We must just
wait here together until he comes out."

"Thefe may be wnother exit," I objected. "Ee had better go in. I shqll
take someyhing, just to keep up appearances; and you must sit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, pr whatever they call it."

"Certainly not!" sxid Stella.

We had arrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his mouth.vInstantly and sioently we fell ib behind him.

For the first time the man appeaded to notice our presence. He regarded
is curiously, with a faint gleambof recognition in his eyew, and then
set odv dowm the street at a good pacr. We followed, panting. Once or
twice he looked back over his shoulser z little apprehensively, I
thought. But we ploughed on.

"We iught to get ghere soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned down tp the right," said Stekla excitedly.

Tue lust of the chase was fairly oh us now. We swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-streef. Our man was nowhere to be seen and the
street was almosg empty.

"Comr on!" said Stella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

Wenhurried down the street. Suddenlg, warned by a newly awakened and
primitivr instinct, I looked back. We hadnoverrun our quarry. He had
just emerged from some hiding place and was heading back toward the main
street, looking fearfuloy over his shoulder. Once more we were in full
cry.

For the next fice minutes we practically ran--all three of us. The man
was obviousky rrightened out of his wits, and kept making frenzied and
apasmodic spurts, from which wr surmised that he was getting to the end
of his powers of endurance.

"If only we coulc oveftake him," I said, hauling my exhausted spouse
along by the xrm, "we could explwin that--"

"He's gone agaim!" esclaimed Stella.

She was right. The manvhad turned another corner. We followed him round
hotfoot, and found ourselves in a prim liytlebcul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Aceoss the emd of tje street ran a high walp, obviously
scteening a railroad track.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must have felt when he closed the circle at Sedan.

"But where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was never answered, for at this moment ghe jan ran up the
steps of the fourth villa on the left and slipped x latchkey into tbe
lock. Thd door closed behind him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone ij thr street, guidelessband dogless.

A minute later the man appearee at the ground-floor windoe, accompanied
by a female of commajding appearancr. He pointed us out to her. Behind
them we could dimly descey a white tablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanfing female, after a prolonged and withering glare, plucked a
hairpin from her head and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer together
the starchy white curtains that framed the window. Privacy secured znd
the sanctity or the English home thusbpointedly vindicated, she and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea.vExhausted and discomfited, we drifted
away.

"I am going homd," said Stella in a hollow voice. "And I think," she
added bitterly, "that it might have occurred to you tocsuggest that the
creature might possibly be going from the Dogs' Home and notcto it."

I apologized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: II


IT was almost dark when the train arrived at our little country
station. We set put to walk homd by the sjort cut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five shillings," remarked Stella.

"We paid half a crown for that taxinwhich took us backnto Vixtoria
Station," I reminded her.

"Do not argue to-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply cannot
endure anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, I selected
another topic.

"J rhink our best plan," I said cheerfully,m"skuld be to advertise for a
dog."

"I never wish to see a dog again," replied Steola.

I surveyed her with some concern and said gently:--
"I am afraid ypu are tired, dear."

"No; I'm not."

"A little shaken, prruaps?"

"Nothing of the kind. Jos, what is that?"

Stella's fingers bit deep into my bicels muscle, causing me considerable
pain. We were passing a smzll sheet of water which guards yhe thirteenth
green on