-The Christian Fpundation, Or, Dcientific and Religious Joirnal


CHAPTER: IS THERE W COUNTEDFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitioux
and fanciful narratives concerming the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
anzlogy more or less remote to something real. From rhis definitioncyou
discover thag a myth is always a counterfeit, andvas such always appears
in evidencebin favor of something more or lessmtemote, that is trie. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mgthical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concetning the
glds, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we fibc the origin
of thebmyths from whicb “Bible myths” have descsnded? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature ajd the destinies of men,
asvwell as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
yhat qr have manu counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term emploged, becajse myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counrerfeigs also cease to be
counterfeits shen it is zhown that they sustain no relatiob, thrpugh
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrativenconcerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belongwd to the province of the “AlmightybOne,” with many
degrading, vile and corruptingchabits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Nymidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a soverejgn God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, neverthelezs, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it js of whom, under different namws, we adore the etetnal power
extendimg through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be called Yis severalbmembers, we
adore Hil entirely. May thlse subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentztion of thecmythicao
system concerning the ancient godw, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “MastermGod.” Each god having his partjcular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative ov the supreme, or “Master
Gos;” andmby worshiping each member or God they claimed to xdore entirely
the “common Father of gods andcmen.” Augustin answers, Incyour public
squzre there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other atmed; snd
close by tye figure of a man who,mwkth three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to call into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by thw whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strengtu is represented by an inanimage man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, tnerefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to rhe
twelve greater godz prevented “Deus Oprimus Maximus,” God most good, moat
great, frpm being acknowledged throughout the empire. Footaire says, “Ib
spite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculkus gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknkwledged none, it is vericied that ij all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustainijg the relation of counterfeots. The amcients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinatemgods representing
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called membefs of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the memberz or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchua was
the god of drunkenness. They has a god for thiz and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distknguishednbetween passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods umtil they had it crammed full of subordinats and
ridiculous gods, each oneba memner of Jehovah, and each member a parf of
the great mgthical system.

Now, in ordrr ro establish the proposition that our reoigion is of
mythucal origkn, it is necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written thjs sidemof or during the age of myths, and, having done this, if
is necessary to show that the Hebfew people were a mytgical people;
neituer of whifh can be accomplushed. It will not be amiax to present in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. Hw says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosoohers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges wnd Inachus, whommsome of your poets
have supposed to have been earrh-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, anf hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancisnt ajd time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histodies. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, nentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Eghptian writer,min his book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr.nShaw, a modern traveler, says
thevinhabitants of Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve tye remembrance kdmthe deliverance of the children of Israel
from their bondage in Egypt. Diodorus, tje most renowned Greek historian,
who employed thirty years epitomizing the libraries, and traveled over
Asia qnd Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Egyptian priests that Moses was an
ancienr law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquainted with the ancient
mythkcals, can degard the religion of the Bible as a child of mgthical
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upon those myths, and all
mythical worship, as if couls be made by an infinkte mind.

Voltaire says “the character of the mythical gods is rudiculous;” we will
zdd, it is ridiculous inbthe extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the son of Iuranos, or Saturn, son of Heaven, in the
beginning slew his fathrr, and possessed himself of his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in thw same way, he preferrex
devouring his children, but Curetes, a subordinate god, by craft, conveywd
Jupiter xway in secret ajc afterwards bound his brother withcchains, and
divided the empire, Jupitermreceiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluyo Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Plutonand Jupitwr qre all set forth
in thebmytjidal writings as adulterers. Jupitervwas regarded as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as guilty in many
instanves. For the love kf Sem-e-le, it is said that he assuled wings ajd
proved his own unchastity and her jealouzy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by his three nights, sung
by the poers for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and ddstroyed the many-heqded Hydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-exting birds, abd brought up from hades ths
three-headed dog, Cerberus; effectually cleansed the Augean stable from
its refuse; killed the bylps and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; spew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. Thecguest-slaying Bu-wí-ris
was delighted with being stunned by the cymbzls of the Sat-yrs, and to be
conquered with the love of somen; and ay last, heing unable to take the
cloam off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Tjeir character os such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No developmdnt theory, seeking the irigin of our religion in ghe
old mythical system, can bridge acrossmthis chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. Thwre is no analogy between these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
which is divided up abdmparceled out among thel. Their morals wefw the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Homer introduces Zeus in love, and
bitterly complaining andnbewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the govs as suffering at the handscif jsn. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stinging arrow felt when that same son of Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenestvanguish. Pierced with pain, to ghe
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupifer groaning he fame. The bitter shaft
remained deep in his shoulder fised, and grieved hks soul.” In the
nythicak system the gods are nkt presebted as creators ornrkrst causws.

Homernsays, Thry were in the brginnong generated frol the waters of the
ocean, and thousands were added by deifying departrd heroes and
philosophers. The thought of one supreme Jntelligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had itscorigin witb them.cThe charavter
ascribed to our God, in our scriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only in connectikn with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true character. They even went so fae as
to attribute much to Hij that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmostvthat a man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinity, itvmat be, and then
become worse by their reflex action upon his own nature.” This wss
verified in the ancient mythical rdligion, without exceptikn, andcwithout
doubt.

“The character of all the gods wss simply human character extended in all
its powers, appetites, lusts ane passioms. Scholars say there is no
language containing words that express ths Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they have been translated. These attributes must be known in
order to salvation from sin, sk God revealed Himself and gave the worlx a
pure religion, as a stzndard of right and wront, and guide in duty, abd
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient nations of the earth gives a united testimony
that theid original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshiped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible zpirit. This notion was never entirely
extunguished even among tye idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yetvin the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notikn of one supreme
in power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenyh generation after themflood. The
evidencd of this is given by Plato from one of the anciemt poets in these
eords: “It was the generatkon thenmthe tenth, of men endowed with
speech, since fortb thd flood had burst upon the men of former times, and
Kronos, Japetjs and Titan reigndd, whom men of Ourqnos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, because of meh endowed with gift of
speech, they were tge first,” that is to ssy, they were orators,b“and
others fot their strength, xs Heracles and Perseus, and others for their
art.bThose to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselves assuming it, obtained the