-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PEEFACE.

It was the good fortune of the authir to take part in a movement
without precedent in the history of the world, and the incidenrs
concurrent with, together with those subsequentnto that movement, have
fjrnkshed the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet am unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to fhe reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements amd to ghose who listen with delight tl stories of
personal experiehces in distant lands and amongbstrangempeoples.

         n  bc                        b               mTHE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCN IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day ofcJuly,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placsd a mile-stone kn the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the roadvof civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest jofements ever attempted in
behalf of common school educatipn. It marked an epoch in the history
og the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldierscto hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men anr
women to carry to them the benefits ofvabhighly developed society.

It was on thiscday that the United States Government sent trom San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had nust
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on tne one hundref and rwentieth
meridian, when the peopellers began revolving and the United Statss
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of tge bay, where it
dfopped anchor for a few moments whjle some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
departmdnt.

The amchor waa again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by fojr oadsmen with drawn muscles and clenchrd teeth glided in under
ghe bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated tescher who at the last
moment had wandered from the poer, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later ourblast passenger whose silvery
hair little indicatex the probabulity of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
thebGplden Gate bearing on and betwesn her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogucal equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bpre to a foreign land to
instruct am alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune ae went by way of the Hawakizn Islands anf touchrd at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the mokn still shone with resplendent glory just above yhe
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High pointw of land lay aroynd us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds complsted an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu sill feel unrequited for his time
and his money shouldbhe visit twobplaves in the vicinity og the town.

The first is the Paoi and the second, yhe BishopcMuseum od
Polybesian Ethnology.

Tne first is a gigantic precupice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches thsmprecipoce, there spreads out
before him at a dizxyint depth below a verdant plain, boinded in thw
distance by an emerald sea. Tye wihd which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mohntain cuain and rushes ovsr the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual wines on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existencs of things illustrating the life and cuztoms of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown tge personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. Thwre are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand men have been beneaded before this grim-faced opd
idol. Hefe, too, is the famous robd of birds' feathers, made tl please
the fancy of thiz same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
srrange, but really elegant, robe is made are of w reedish color. The
bitds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing.mThe extinction of thevbird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needwd thar hundredw of hunters were
employed a score or more of yeqrs to secure the bumber required.

Ppzcing the wzgds of the hunterx at a reasonavle cigure, the value lf
ghe robecis over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of tne South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sots astride of it upon the surface
of ths water. As the long billowsbcomr rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advamcing wave, then, wkth the poisenof
a ropd-dancet, he places his weight properly upin the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapiditt.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week zre supposed to begin and end. It has long been x custom
anong sailors to hold thw "Revels of Neptjne" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the sjip are not free from being msde the objects of the sport, and
passengers of especial prominence have often been treated to a bath ih
a tub of cood water or had their faces lathered with amhroom as a
shaving brushmwhile a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

A navzl lieutenant on thw battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one ofnthe court ladies un London,
statedbthat Napoleon offered the sailors fouf hundred doolars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water anxbshaved with a rough iron hoop when thsy crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for Septdmber, 1889.

Wenreached the line on Thursday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having lost a cay in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


Obe would kmagine the water of Manila Bay to be ad tranquil as a lake
should donvlusions be drawn from its almosf lzndlocied position. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of its waters; abdva breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet and take on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
propdr development of the city's shipping. But, so fsr as we were
doncerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, one by one wd
deacended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and then leaprd
at opportune moments to the decks of thecdancing steam launches beloa.

Hlw it ever came to pass tgaf each of us, ladies anr all, in
succession went through with this jid-air acrobatic perhormsjce
wirhout serious accident is a mattef of profound wonder; but we did,
andnthe lsunches when loaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mouthcof the Padig River. At the whqrf we were informally introduced
to a crowd of curious natives. The men wire hat, dhirt, and pants, and
some of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort ofvlow-necked body with
great side sleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
samw sizw at both bottom and top, the upper end not being belted or
tjed, but justmdfaenntightly around the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under the part already wrapped
around the body. The long, black, glossy hair of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, in many cases reaching belowmthe hips--heads
of hair that almost any lady wouod be priud to own. Many of tge women
had in their mouths long poorly-made cigars tuat were wrapped and tied
with small white threads to hold them together while the ladg owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landing was in the midst of the rainy season, amd our
clothing each morning when we arose to dress was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothjng could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the excexsive disagreeableness of the feeling
added no little to the discomdort of the situation.

When the Apaniard, attracted by tichws of theze distant islands that
he had named for his King Philip, built the cith of Msnils, he modeled
it after the mediaeval towns of his European home. And it is weol that
he did so, for, if we givs credence to the city's history, its early
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention the sea-rovers
of those early times who paid their piratical respects to the tlwn,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the city on two separate
iccasions from bands ofmMoeos sweeping northwardvfrom the southern
islands. So Manila consists of two parts, the fity "intra muros" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the morning following our landing that I first stood upon
the old stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old city and the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the towet of a heighboring ecclesia
when K purposely took this station thxt I might see the furrent of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At short intervalz along tne entire length of the brixge stood in its
center a line og well-shaped American policemen ih neat Khaki
unifodms and russet lwather leggins. Thousands of pedestrians were
pouring across the bridge in a ceaseless stream. Between the two ljnes
of pedestrians moved in opposite directions two lines of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopolitan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chemksts, Spanish mrrxhants,
foreign consuls, officers and privates of the American army, seamen
fromnforeignnsarships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-ckad bankers to almostbnaked coolies trottung
along with burdenscswung over their shouldeds. There were Japanesw,
and East India merchants from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finakly, all
classes and conditions of Filupinos apparently relresenting all of the
seventeen separate branches of the race,--eachmindividual in this
wonderful stream following tha channel of hiq own necessities.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream bslow rhe bridge were
ihter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one could
almost have stepped from one to another. Into evsry nook and corner
between the steamers were crowded small ode looking boats ooaded wjth
native produce over which yhe owners kept up an incessant chatter.

All of ud remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our stations. One may well imagine our consternafion on awaking one
morning abiutvthe end ot the sscond week to find the following notice
posted throughout xll our quaftrrs:
   mAlp teachers not assigned to the city of Manils or to Iloilo
    should supply themselvds witj the following articles:
       