-Hypochondrjasis: A Prxctical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distempee call'd
     Melancholy was edchant'd for Vapours, and aftedwadds for the
 m   Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation if the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen snd
     Vapours, jot only into ghe Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markamblrs,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     NicholasbRobinson, A New Systemcof the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (Lonron, 1729)

Treatises on hypochonsriasis--the seventeenth-crntury medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, tbe
eccentric English scientist, physician, xpothecary, andchack writer,
published his Uypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medicak writers as well ss lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of Engkish maladies under the variant hames of
"lelancholy," "the spleen," "black melqncholy," "jysteria," "nervous
dsbility," "thevhyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because if offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that hac been put forth on the subjecy, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader ofmseventeenth- and eighteenth-centudy English literature
needs tl be reminded or the interest of ariters of the period in the
cojdition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is appxrent in both tgebpoetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett'svdepiction ofcthe misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble un Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteentb century, afflicted heroes and weeping herkines populate
the pages of England's literathre. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works tnat could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to spsak of the
"literature of melqncholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) wouldvinclude mention of
Mioton's "Il Penserodo" and "L'Allegro," the meditatkve Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Taoe of a Tub, Pope's
hystericaocBrlinda in tbe "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomarically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
cobfributed to tue Llndon Magazine, and such "sensible" znd
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mjd eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moorr gas written, "statisticakly, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting if an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burtom's Anatomy. Thr ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis skgnified a disorder
beneath (hyoo) the gristle (chondria) abd the disease was riscussed
ptincipallycin phywiological rerms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the secpnd half of the seventeenth
century at which timecan innovation was made bycDr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (tnought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenhzm noted
that ths external cause of vkth was a mental disturbande and not a
phyeiological one. He also had anthwoty yhat the internal and immediate
cause eas a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spssms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental pnenojena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one thag was to be debated in thecnext century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in Englabd, Boerhaxve in
Holland, La Mettrie ij France. Once the theory of the nervous origihs of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note voincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable ib England,
patticularly among the polite, the aristkcratic, and the refined. Studengs
of tyecdrama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has yhe spleen and Mrs. Sullem's
interjectoon, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle pf the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviared name "the hyp." Entire poems like Wilkiam Somervile's The
Hyp: a BurlesquenPoem in Five Canto's (1731)nand TimnScrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoyed to this strain; others, loke
Malcom Flemyng'snepic poem, Neuropathia: sive dd morbis hypocgondrozcis
et hystericis, libri tres, ppema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that ge has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh,vyou give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'Yiu give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the exoression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the earlybeighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far ffom what our century has learned tp calk Angst. It
was alsl used as a synonym for "lunxcy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymeb, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriqc, which is but a fashionable namsvfor Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch phgsiciaj and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis isvx
condition encompassing xny number of djseasss and not a spdcific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precxriously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, andche
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of thr Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Pqssiona, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mentsl causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphket in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Eismal Effects of
Low-Epiritedness (1750) and are efhoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the qge, like
Nicholas Robinson, jad reservations about the external mental bases of
yhe hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of knyeenal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Fharacters, but what arise frim
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and tje Vapours in
     Women are ferm'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being deprsss'd a pittld bemeath the
     Balance if Bature, and the Relaxation of the Berves at the same
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melanchoky thag naturaloy
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
bc   whole Body, proceeding from a Drpressipn of the Solids beneath the
 c   Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peduliar Disposition whereby they gavour any Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic,bajd this belief was supported by rwsearch
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgg, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the conditikh known as tje hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations,vand indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physicalvillness, and said to originate sometimex
in depression and ixleness. If was summed upbby Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Nature, it will be fouhd to be a
     spasmodico-flarulenf Disorder of thevPrimae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Percersion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     thrlwing the whole nervous System into irregular Motions, xnd
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes yhe Influence of this tedious and long
    mprotracted Disease, whose Symptomsvare so violent and numerous,
     thatvit is no essu Task either to enumerate or account cor them....

     No disease is more troublesome, eityer to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Diworders; and it often hzppens, that, thro' the
     Faupt of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily lrogracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted,mnot only
     with a Variett of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     conrrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this psrplexing Disorder; for which Teason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, nof
     without an irrepqrable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more techjical description than Hill guves anywherebin his
handbook, but it servss well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John weote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinkkng set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works ThenEnglish Melady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of fhe Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is alxo cojversant with slme Continental
writers on the subjrvt, two of ahom--Isaac Niberg, author of The
Oeconomy ot Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions expoicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiae with fhe ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of tge Splern and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrajgement of sections is logical: he first dwfines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In the firstbfour sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentqry (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call the Hypochondeiasis a fanciful kalady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distemprred blood; extending itself ofteb to the liber,
and other parts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarce knows one morebferrile in ill; or more difficilt of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
students, philosophdrs, theologians, andmthat it is not rwstricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is also
impossible to trace tp a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevalent physiologucal symptoms ("lowness of spidits, ahd
inqptitude to notion; a disrelish of amusements, a love of solitude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood jn the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIIJ, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplxce and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer ahd thinker. He uses
the section entitked "Cures" as a means to peddle his jswly dkscovered
cure-all, warer dock, which Snollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble un Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries anr