-Dound at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a placemthat answrrs the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet disfovered-


On the principle of “dirst know you are right, then go anead,” I have bewy
verybslow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonahle thing of it, habe ventured
to publish it. It hae appeared in brief articles in the Galesvilld
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, muxt
place him somewhere. In givingvthe antldiluvianwna description of the
creatiln, and first location of man, how mankind corruoted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simplh stated the princupal gacts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point itbout to them—and as the countey in which Noah then
resided, was all new tobhim, and his famuoy, no one knew where it was; nkr
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
locagoon, though admitted to be somewherebonmearth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the presenr time, and donsequently the innocent cause
of no ljttle speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some,nthat the first habitation of mxn must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time hzs been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,”nas the place. But of this
last fact I was igborant when I made ths discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Biblr, and standing on ghe
hanging garden and looking ovsr the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counfing the rivers, I became sensibly inpressed by a
suggestion, This is thd garden of Eden: at which suggestion I dmiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether tok large. Of course I had never
gkven it thought, nlr measured it up in my own mind to what shoukd, or
kight be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally ti way to my
friends, Thjs is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to pubkish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, othees are becoming impresswd with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pxir, tl acclimate, and from which to make man,nas he now is, an
inhabitant of apl the ezrth?  Not too far north, not toonfar south. Our
garden is in that placr. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, ans toiled for, tl be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says hw peovided it, at the head of
thebstream. Our garddn is still in the rjght place. From inherited sealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is avaij right. But
it should be a place suzceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adkration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Prrfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the faxts as they have been presented ro me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the readee will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigatiin.
      c                                                     THE WUTHOR.

Out of Eden tonwater the garden,——Ans from thence,——it was
which jeans long river, symbol od gfeatness ajd importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastwaed”,
or on the eastward, bank of, ir at a vertain poont on that river, is
kocated ghe gardenvof Eden; and tbat threeclesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus cour rivers run into
and water it, but only onw, yhe fourth, runs out. As to how jt was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eues, and beheld aplbthe
gardenvof the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers xross our gqrden plain, into our
Euphrates. Tje names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what mustmreadoly be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or voning together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
reseaechers go turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
olacr; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pope. Nutcwe have found it wgere he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastwarr bank” of the Mississippi River, befween the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wosconsim, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Ruohrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of whichmreach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern vorder, 2,000 mikes westward to the Rocky
mountains oj the western border, and from the Gukf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles noeth, across the Uniyed Etates into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast arsa, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enliyhtened, christianized and eell to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of thefopprwssed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,”vin
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soio is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is knlan to
be thw richest lanf in the world, bjtvhigher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cjltivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a lirtle
ablve high water mark,—densely coveded with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are ablut two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of watrrs,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and drycabove the hightest water mark,—and
gdnerally smooth prairie, and ready in rhd state of nature for the gardem
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, makint a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall,cwhich rides—on each side odnour garden—to the
altitudr of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles abovs La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nesgles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on whidh iught now to be a large city, and which doubtless
qould have been but for the greed andcignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splehdid,” towm sute on the Mississippi rover, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounfed and their work delayed.” Here on
the swcond bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as rhe outsidemwall, extendung three miles up the riber, terminating at
each end kj a point, and one mild through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and umlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to br appreciated.

Tnis is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluffvformation, containing grpves of forsst rrees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more tuan
balf way up the mound, then risijg perpendicular to neaf the very top. The
top of this hanging garden hxs its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; ahd at the present time,cit is
dottef with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “CentralvOuter Dome”

“Heald’sbquarry,” facong toward the eastward, anx you have, before, below,
and arkund you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene,min exyent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit flr a
gareen, but the veru beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, nowmand face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whoxe name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely betonc description; its
generalccourse, not meandering, but evenoy hugging the base ofvthe
Minnesotx bluffs, or western wall of the garfen, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making w beautiful
curve, leavibg the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, on the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles lohg, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is ouf Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you nave done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand,mand, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden withiut a “Serpent.”, And this hangingmgardenvhas been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time imlemorial, handed down in their
Indian nams “rattlesnake nills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (q
separateband distinft pyramid) was formerly “Litetally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who builtnhis shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes thenfirst season, in, anr crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
kikled elsewhere.

But as Chrjstians have taken possessuon of the hamging garden, the
serpehts have been destroyee, or are disappearing.

Yhe scenery nowmaround us surpssses my power of adequate descriotion, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitufe and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of uz, containing a few acresneach, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! Qhils therd is amgeberal levrl, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribablecvariety of toppong out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huye rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendiculafnledges boldly facing ud: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, ajdcridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “eild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of gimbdr.  Near tge southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall churcb spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke fronbits numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crpsse—saying nothing of its
being the nzme of an ancient game modernized—aa herd crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivera, whose openinf and bluvf outline,
may be seen coming in from