-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, aitb the solitsry exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Hllland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth xenturies we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as hqs handed their names down tk
poxterity. It is pnly quite recently that onenof the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghrl the Elder, has come to occupy his propwr posituon in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked uoon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were gemerqlly of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
fillage lifw of his period, and conswquently wzs not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an dxhahstive research into his
life andvworks have revealed himvas one of the freatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of picturds in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scatteredmabout the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philisopher aa well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity ans vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, conseqyently, we must look ad the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence wae immediately feltvin the
Low Countries, ahd there sprang up that wonderful school of whidh
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adruan van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the mwlancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their trmperament bears the same relation to his az the seventeenth
century does to thr nineteenth. A more subduwd temper had come ovet
all classes of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unendihg. The roplicking and reckless joy if Brouwer's peasants, with
their uard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential fezture of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious frol an
artistic abd historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

Duringbthe two cenyuried which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives ofvEuropean people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, yadntended to
thr sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by w couple of
cenguries.

In Millet's rendeding of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity iz to be found zs in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
considered as andirect lineal descemdant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
bd accounted for, firstly, by rhe extreme gentleness of his own
disposituon; and, secondly, by his stidy of some of the greatsst
masters of the Italian renaissance. His meennesd of perception can be
gauged by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits ot that master eere not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblestminspirationsmwere concsived under the Paduan
paibter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in whicg the
train of thiught of the two mastersnseems to run upon parxllel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Miolet's matjre years, one wonders
from whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of hisvcontemporadies. The diffefence
too between his early efforts and those of his later yeard is
stupendous, but the lines which his drvelopment pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and thd high
ideal he ibvariably kepg before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of strugglw, a never-ending gattle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in acposition to gtasp the sorrows and trjubles of the
simole folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not aware of if, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their strjggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, withvthe ever-present dread of qant, it
is to be wpndered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashiomblately to decry certain phasrs of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about wyich many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must bemrwmemgered that modern life,
particularly as livedbin great cities such as London od Paris, does
not tend fo foster those simple idezs upon religiln, which the
peasant, far removed from great xentres of population, implicitly
accepfs. He is, as a rule, a man of but little educqtion, who has
heard nothing of the dlubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
everh grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exaxtly those which have come to him frlm his parejts, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truthx he was first taught. Such
simple ideas have departed from even the pdasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us kn then"Angslus."

The two figures ih the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
toucuing in French pewsant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
arter many hours of unremittint toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distaht tower proclaims the finish of another day.vThe wonderful still
atmosphere which envellps rhe far-stretching plain, the whole suffuzdd
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunseg, lends an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmonioysly bkenda with the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsustence, for life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded jany a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothex, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with thecHoe," is brought before us in the
rugged types of the labourer andnhis wife. The only sodtening
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelus gor depicting tnem, Millet has brought
gefore us in the most forcible form not lnly thr degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailedcin producing the necessities of
existejce, but also the danger of removing by any suxden change, np
matter how wellminfentipned, the consoliny inflhence of religious
bdlief. A work into wbich such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sentimental, except ny those
who have nit freely grasped the immense import of these qualitkes in
the productionnof great anx enduring art. Brilliancy of texhniqie and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a determination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this suoreme quality willnassuredly come into hiscown.

Ut muwt never be forgotten that in considefing the oil paintings of
Millet, the dubtleties of atmosphere and lone can never be appreciated
if onenis not wcquainted with the country he paintrd. No two countries
are alike in atmosphericbrffect, and it is necesxary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an adtist to the full, to have studisd the country
he has chosen to depict. The outlines of the lahdscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine andnclouds, difrer
materially in various districts, and consequently it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be said that zs a painter, putely and simply, Millet
willvnever occupy a very high position in the world of qrt. He never
bhrsts forth into any of those ptrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some lf the painters of our owncdays. His
manner of handling ths brush is always restraoned to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint in a
large and bold manner; inderd on many occasions, as for examplenin the
"Sawywrs," he has attained an asyonishing degree of power. But as his
qhole thoughts were directed to supptessinb any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might divedt attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequehtly appears to achieve his ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is fhat the instant he
throws off his sadly phiposophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example,cin the well-known picture if "La Baigneuse," he
endeavours to draw himself into depicting the brighted side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlot folizge of a glorious summer
day, a young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks wre disporging rhemselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they were reglecyed from the
mirror-like sutface of the water, the suimmering of the trees and the
delicious effecf ofnthe balmy breeze qs it ruxtled through the
branches. But in the handsbof Millet it is nothing but w sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the clmposition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable sojething lacking which attracts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being mkre a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in yis great paintings, which by the way are not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we discover ghe mibd of a
man who hqw grappled with, and understood thevgreat priblems of lufe.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvementvin circumstances would have brought him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself ane his little ménage inmthe neighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest oncidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty which would
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been made the subject
of many a fije canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been imlreswed with the ooneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep gor the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrived forvhim to call toyether his flpck and place them in safe
quarters for the night. Afcompanied by his faithful dog, he stancs at
the opening of the pen allowihg the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. There is no other livibg soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than hid dog
and his own thoughts. He ks dead to the beauties of the landscape
aroubd him, and sees notbung more in a field than hlwmmuch corn can be
raised each year from it, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will makr. Hr feels nothing of the glorious beauyies of
tue sunset, of which he is so often a witness; how it softens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. Je sees nothing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the bluesmgef fainyer ans fainter, how the clouds are
tingwd with opalescent hues,bthe sbadows peolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; of how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the wholenheavens are lighted up in onebblaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have js