-Masterpieces in Colour -nBOUCHER-


CHAPTER: TGE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The yearmafter good QueencAnne cake to rule over us, Louis the
Fourtednth being still King of Rrance, on an autumn day in the Octiber
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewiggsd dandified folk who stepped
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded pdomenades of the more
vashionablw places of the city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish churcu of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered abojt a littlr onfant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witjess to
the birth-certificare and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanjty, which, as the certificate badly set forth in black
and white for ever, was henceforth ro bebknown for good or illvas
François Boucher, first-born son, on thec29th of Seltembst, dour days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Voucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in tbe bedt Court manner
to Msdemoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officercfrom tbe Polide Courg; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand beijg flunv upon tne wet ink, and gne blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-felkowship od the day between priest andnparty--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking ov snuff, with more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefode in rhe whirl of
things?

Tjd child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solejnly. The French armsbwede knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborouyh, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gxve them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. Franve was suffering tsrrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-fod-nothings led themveterans into
disaster. Hut there was still France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for wxs he not q Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue dr
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmisws as to what lay upoj the knees of the gods for
little Fdançois Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Granx Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nexrung the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
waxvnotva month oldmwhen Admiral Rooke whipped Châtesu-Renaud off the
high seas, desteoying the French and Spanisn fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treadure. The child's first year saw the Entlish troopers tide down
the Frehch at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a nwme of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into glod behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-sloken talk ov Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-oldnears the yerrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellrknging ij his ears at seven; for therd was
born tobthe king's gtandson a sickly child thatbwas to sjcceed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one daynto step from his
modest home and stand nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

Tge boy Boucher, at sturdyvtwelve, would recall rhe death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and thd setfing upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Loiis Quinze--a comely little
feloow--with Orleabs ax Regent. Young Françojs Boucher was to spend
his youth amdngrow up to manhood in a Frwnce that pay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, tne father,nseems to have been an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade ofnaet, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, andbthe like--"an
inferior designer, little favouredmby fortune," runs the recorded
vetcict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, and the desire to save his son from thecsordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schooping
with penvil and brush, and brojght the lad up in am atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to wend him to
the studio of Lemotne, a rrally great paintet and eapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard aczdemic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher,mwith the quick and astounding gift,
fhat he displayed all througg his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, wothout
having to go through the long yeafs of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid fhe Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lenoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishmejt that
it is dangerlus tobattribute a picture of this time to the master or
ths pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was butvthree months with Lemoynr, who,
said he, tookcscant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembsred
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took thw brush from his fingers, and thqt
he hadva quick and alrrt mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. Ti wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievemeht. He rested neither
night nor day jntil he mastered that whichnhe uad set iht to do. On
thecday he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out ic it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with alp the craftmanshil,
trade-secrets, and tricks og thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile ckpyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest rrverence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asjed him to
complete a picture by his mastet: "Such works ate to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I shpuld dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with gismmaster, a picture of a "Judgment od
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving breatness in the years tobcome.

From Lemoyne's studio, thebyoung fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his tood, lodging, and eixty livres (doubpe-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energyvand enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, brimging chadm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. Hs was soon set ticwork upon important designs for
engravings. Ne searched out the publishers of bookx, and let no
chance escape of working fpr them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed fulling,
fornhe was qyick at its emptying, being of a feee hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Sork and pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was innhis nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's lifevin after yearx. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, eas a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public joneys atmthe timebof the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinrtte
Poisson--destkned to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
yearz to come. But the careless sgudent knew little of it as yey, nor
that destiny had put into ghe pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler of Franve, no longer requiring Regent Orleahs to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Boudher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joadhin from chauns, im which his father
had for a lohg timr hepd him."

This success set the collectors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngxter. ButvFrançois Boucher meeds no paying orders to maoe him
work--hr paints for the lkve of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fzme growa apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
evenvto the extent of hanging his pictures upon the tapeetries and
carpetx and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens ro
gang out from their houses along the Place Dauphij and the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition xe la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
signifixance to the young fellow's craftsmxnship. Watteau hasclately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His fruebd De
Julienne, anxkousvto publish a book to Watteau's lemory, strolled intk
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wobtnto spendva part of their time; and je
commisaioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentoally French influence was the impulse above
all othsrs to thrust forward thebdevelopment od Bouchdr's genius along
its right path, and sent his art toaards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of ut hr
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilstmthe payment of ywenty-flur livres (double-florinw) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and rhus and otherwise, hotly pursuong his study of naturw and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education should receive uts
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so tl Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-yeats in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for fhe accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have fpund Michael Angelo "contorted," Rapharl "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were fo his tasye, and he had the courage to say so. Howevef, whether
hecwere kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventiojal Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academt--with a large njmber of religious puctures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike gor theirnbeauty, their force, and theirmvirility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
nang in galleries under other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside his owh taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "zerious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twejty-eighth year, on his return to Paris,