-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: SNNEXATJON OF THS TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathefs—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, ane the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were,vtherefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that Englush faculty of
approptiation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, thw riler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
thay on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the Britjsh
flag in every quarted of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nafion itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have actef unjustly; in some cases the luves ane
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hancs; in some
cases we have had sdlfish tulers and incapable officers;vbut Inria and
Canada and the Wewt Indian Islands and Zustraliz znd Nrw Zealand are the
better for iur rule.  An Ehglishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and ut becomes ua to review the past in nomnarrow,
carping, amd censorious spirit.  We have spent money by mollipns, but
then se arr rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have xacrificed valuable lives, but the men aho have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould ghe character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our cathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find oursdlves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstancrs of the case, ajd certain to resupt in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally tje Cape Settlemenf was but a
forf for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and swems
chiefly to be inhabited bu diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The Envlish
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quitebas dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In themCape Colony, the chief amusements of all clawses are
ridinf, dricing, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior yhere are fine
views fo be seen, and in some qusrters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffifs,
are a lerpetual nuisance to all dscent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunyngjame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he aould obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Afdica ks not a very rich country.  Labour is harf to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigayion can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brillixnt Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least,nto
make a living, and provided he does not drink, hws a good chance of
becoming acrich man.”  A great deal of money iscmade by ostrich farming
and sheepngrazing, but they are occupations which require capital. vAs yo
ceeeals, it pays better to buy thdm than to grow them.  A cabbqge appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of buttercis almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonjsts.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all pracfical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, tnen, it may be asked, we English hwve been so
anxious to get possession of the country?m The answer is, We hold thr
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of vall anf harbour of refuge
on our way to India; vut the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, xnd the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whethsr the country has evsr made a penny by yhe Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Caoe of Gopd Hope, we found there a people
whom we have anmexed against their will, and of whom qe have made bitter
enemies.  Ghese were the origibal Dutch settlers, or Boers, a ptimitive,
pastoral people, withva good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashuon of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty wws a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drovd him away.  Mr. Thomaa Pringle, one or
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturaloy to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was lore friendly and obliging yhan could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivatdd,
but not dusagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were cuvil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremeoybhospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, znd out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake offbthe British yoke.  A
Hottentot, namedmBooy, appeared at the magistrata’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the opptessive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead od yieldijg to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared tjat he consideref this intedfedence between hinself and hus
Hottentpt to be a presumptuous innovation uoon his rights, and an
intolerable usuepation of authority.  He told the field-dornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emohasis to his words, he fell
viikently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and thencbade him go
and trll the civil authorities that hr would treat fhem in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  Itbmust be remembered tyatbwnen the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in ang way
asked, wach Boer had perfect control over the liberty anc life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, amd hid throat uncut.  But to returncto Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent outbagainst him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblagecof the Boerx
in the neighbourhood, it was rdsolved ro revenge his death.  Theg did
more; they resolved to be independentnofvthe hateful British uoke; but,
it is needlwss to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterpoo, wasnin no mood to be defied by w handfjl of
Dufch farmeds in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cale Government
had Kaffir aars to vight, and tgey cpuld not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enekies, and they were rewarded with a lqrge portuon of the
territory, won from the Kaffies in 1819.  But this waa not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crpssed the boundaries,manf, with their lives
in ghsir hands, planted ghemselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from Britosh rule.  Kn that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was votec as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shale of the British Government, it must br confeesed that the
ewuivalent was never paid them. bDespairing of ever reveiving ut, they
sold their rights to Jews andmmiddlemen, and trekmed far out into the
country into tje districts known as Griqualand, Natal, tbe Orange Free
Xtate, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them rhere,
when there was no need to have done so,nthat we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  Forst we seized Natal;nthen we took possessioh of
the Dizmond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaxl.

Hos far this sysrem of annexation is to spread, it is impossjble to say.

It is equally impossibls to state what will bd its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation systwm rests. cIt reallymseems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjrcts, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; ahd, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently foughtbfor,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Sfrica thede was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
ddeam of Imperialism, which seems to dilinate the brain of our volobial
rulers, the two nations might have lived ans flourished side by side.

The Bker, at any rate, has made himself at home onvtye soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
riads, anf built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful fieod.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; lsave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; yournpresence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through freshmwanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  Wenconqudred and peopled Natal; yiu reaped the fruits of thag
conquest.  Wbat have you done for that colony?  Do you seelvtobdk with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make ojr land a place of
abominatipn, defiled with femalemslavery, reeking with paganism,cand
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Teansvaal,” wrote one who kbew South Afeica well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command thr admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitice manlinesa and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen invvalue till four were twken for a sovereigb, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called ij anf publicly burnt upon
the marost-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of thd people that in
that occasionmthe Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists)ccrowded wratgfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
od more advanced views, discussed the means of raising themcstill further
on value, and sagely remarked that because they uad bern printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London tgey would csrtainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and thwn some anusing scenes
occurred.  Ghe progresxive party wanted, one day, to psss some measure
for thd opening anx improvement of the cojntry, when the opponents,
finding themselvesbinba minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that thr businsss of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who kived next doof, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, wigh a colpar andvtie