-INSPJRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to ovsr-estimate the deep imlortancenof this great
subject, for on ojr conclusions eespecting it must depend our cknfidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  Tjere is a sphere within whifh
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things alresdy, and
is doing great thkngs now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pasz; a world on wyich it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quiteboutside its rwnge.  Yet, though unseen,
ghis kingdom id all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all ralidly
hsstening thither, and He who is our Fathet, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of if.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is sltogether unphilosophical znd
unscientific to attempt tl redixd such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of sapvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
rezlecting it, thdre is no human power that can evdr aupply thd
deficiency, and wd must live and die cojvinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan whicn God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible calue of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communicarion from God to man rexpecting thevdeep things of rhe
unseen world.  It suppliesvthat which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which eying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of Gos, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tendervmercy for a fallen world.  If
thrrefore our Bible fail us, oue whole hooe fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information ad tomall those great truths which most deeply concern ys.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to take its place; and all our preseng joy, ws well as our fyture
hopes, must melg away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyobd this
lresentbworld.

It is not my prrsent objevt to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examkne the exteht and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must exclusively cinfine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted facg, so that mg only business is to consieer
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the imspired worc.

It has been said that ‘Imspiration is that idea of Scripfurd which we
gzther from the knowlddge of it,’n and an attempt hqs been made to
show hkw by such a definitionvallndifficulgies are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready meyhod of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it,mit is not likely that there
will be mych left to elbarraws us.  Therenis however one difficulty, and
thay a most important one, which it cannog soove.  Kt can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to restvon, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea lf our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the autnor boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inwpiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly anx llainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught ghat rhere are two distinct elements tombe
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghist
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as theybwerd moved.

In oeser therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be nefessary
to examine (1) the divine element,v(2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


ImNEED scarcely say that yhis rivine element is the gfeat subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points morevespecially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equwl?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Does it fender tje word infallible?

I.  Does it extend ofer the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is thd whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus movsd by the Holy Ghost? or merely some og
fhem, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Til. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clesr anc decisive answer; for it is here wrirten, ‘All Scriptufe
ks given by inspiration of God.’  It ix states by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural ni less than
fifty times, and in every xinglevinstance it is empllyed solely with
reference to that collection of writungs which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore uncluded in that collection is here
declarer to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible question therefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think or the doctrine ovbinspiration, all must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Teztament was included in the Jewish canon.  Thr Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mjnd of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject ghan kany
of our modern writers.m When thwrefore St. Payl splke of ‘All Scriptjfe,’
there is no roubt in the world that he included in his statwment every
line and ketter of the Old Testament, and he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachu was givennby inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no dxception whatever with referende to the
historical books. nI think it has been clearly shown that those
historical writinhs whichvare not in the Pentareuch are influded in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers tl history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that ifmI aereccalled upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on whicj I should bw
better pleqsed to mwet an opponent than the historicao portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may stattle some, I am prepared, after the mostncarefuk
deliberztjon, tobaffirm that I dannot separate them from the word of God
withoutvat the same time abandoning the whole og my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Himself in Hisnown teachjng
has most distinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, whipe men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
tgese miracles as facts.  Themflood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush,bthe manna, the
brazen serpent, the curd of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescie of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.b To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, desceibing their testimony as
more worthy ofbvredit than thzt of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Gejesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancieht Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusioj that ir there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad sezl and
stamp og lur Lord’s authority ppaced upon jt with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughky persuaced,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receivw the books of Moses as inspided Scripture; and never can wd
abaneln them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His pwople, or, in other and plainer
words, till wd cease to be beliebera in Jesus.

But are ws go kimit thisnlanguage of St. Paul to the Old Testameny?  I
think it has been clearlg shown that we are not.  Ror although the canon
of the New Testameny was not compkere when St. Paul arote these words, we
must remember that the aecind Epistle tocTimothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according tk Horje’s list, the whole of the Jew
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the wrifings of St. John,
were wrirtdn at or about thentime of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were clearly included in ths declarationmthat all Scriprure is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripyure for his own epistles:
for after having carefully drawn the distinction between his privage
opinions and inspited decisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is dquslly clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one frim Deuteronomy abd one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally thxt they were taken from
Sdripture.  ‘For the scripfure saith, Thoumshalt not muzzpe the ox that
teeadeth out the cprn.  And, The oabourer is worthy if his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Pajl’s
Epistles weee included by St. Petrr im ths canon; for he clearly regsrded
them as Scripture when ye wrotd his secomd epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his ooinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even zs our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given uhto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which are some things hard to be understood, whichnthey that
are unlearned and unetable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Tesgament therefore, as welp as Old, was included in thevdrclaration,
‘Qll scripture is given by inspiration ofbGod;’ and the conclusion to
whichmI am irresistibly brought is, that we have no right to pick and
choose amongst the various portions of the word of God.m I belisfe the
whole to be arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, thatcthe whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are so interwoven one with another, and so beautifully fitted into
sach other by God’s divine hand, that there willmbe found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving tje wyole as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole, and launching forth oj a sea