-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Tahght by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thinv to make a confident assertion, and such
asseetions produce a greater effect on many minds than the mostncareful
and best-estabpished proof.  Thus it is not ay all an uncommon thing to
hear it assedted with the utmost confidence that whar isvtermed ‘The
Doctrine of the Rral Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result ix that a considerable number of personw believd in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have veen settled by the Vhurch, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; ahereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were rxamines, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are logal to the Church of England
ought npt to be satisfied with anycsuch representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious,mand, now that after thdee
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she hzs never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that bdr own language should bw patiently heard,cand her own teaching
yonestly examined.n This, then, is the objwct of this address.  I am not
about to discuse the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desiregis to ascertain by the careful and candid exakination of
her own documentw whefher there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is cimmonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our fkrst business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amojgst those who maingzinvthat doctrine tjsre arevno
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refed.  Nut, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in adranging the three principal pojnts at
issue under the three hesds of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in thatcorder.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at ths foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be durected.  Now, there can be no dpubr
on the minds of those ego take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that iy is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the mozt precious body and blood of our blessed Waviour.  I am
nlt now discussing in what way we feedbon Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John reder, or do not refer, to the Sadrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief thay they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern isvwith thd fact that, however
we explain His sords, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such w
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Xon of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can ghere be any
doubt thar in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partakjng (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood og Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to thevway in which it is connectsd, for tbat is
the treat point to be determined.  Alk that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, ismit not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we breao, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
breas.’
Two things, thefefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live,vandmthat the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that zacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nwture of the conjexion, there is the widest
possibke divergence.  Rome teaches that by the acr of consecration the
bread anr wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine ceass to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for tye doctrine
of the RealbPeesence in the Church of Engkand differ, aa gar as I can
understand rhem, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, thst
they maimtain that the bread and wine xo notccease to have the accirents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have becomecthe bodg and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight differemce is of nobpractical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid fhe
conclusion drawn from those yexts whicn speak of the bread as brdad, and
the wine zs wine, after consecration.  The pracgifal conclusion us yhe
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Chrisy Humself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what isnmeanr by thenexoression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means tbat He is present in tge elements as a real
ineepsndent object, wkthout any reference to the cuaracter of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the handvof the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart fornsacramental use by
means of consecration, but thatcthey remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, sbd everything else.  That ths
most precious body and blood pf Christ is altogwther spiritualnfood, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alpme.  Thatvthere are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the kther
spiritual; the one for the body, rhe other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, rhe
other of the zoul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  Tgat the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an embldm of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far vonnected by sactamental apoointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warrantef to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the bodt feedz materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually onvthe oyher; but the two acts ade distinct, and thr
one must not bevconfounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the ppiny at issuecis, whetger the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lore and Saviour are in the bread andvin the winr, sl as to
be eateh and drunk whenefer, and bybwhomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone wkthout being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object ks to endeavournto ascertain which of these two
systems isctaught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a positkon to call forth the deepest anxiety andvthe
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsinle for the assertions even of its friendx.  Its
own voicemought to be heard, and itsnown clear statement carefully
studied.  I have np intentiom, thereford, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by s mass of qjotationsbfrom colkateral writers, byt will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself rewponsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homiliss; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—Tuere are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less ulon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teqching of
our Church.  The first of thrm, the twenty-fifth, refers ro dacrzments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Chrixt be not omly badges or tokens of
Christian men’s peofessions, but rather they be certaun sure witnesses
and wffectual sjgns of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth wofk invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and congirm our faith in Him.’  In othet words, before men
theh are badges of our profession,nand before God they are signs or
witnesses by whichcGod works invusibly in the soul.v In this definition
therebis no idea of any change in ths substance kf the sign.  Themsign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accolpanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign,bit pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  Ghe visible sugn and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quife distinct.  Thw one is
mercifully granted in connexioj aith the other, butmnever said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign woyld cease to be a sign if it were
changed imto the thing signified.  With this definition ofna Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  Ig
describes if not merely as a badge of a Christian man’scprofession, nut
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regenerxtion or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receife baptiam rightly (1) are grafred intobthe Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness og sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirked,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s didect gifts to the
soul, anf are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
wster is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but fue
consecration produces nl change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not ib the eater, but is the xct of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
ghe body, and we trust that Gid in heavwn ibgisjbly bestows the invisiblw
gifr on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the vksible sign and the invisible gitt.  If is enough for my
preaent ohrpose to point out tgat the one is not changed jnto the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in othernwords, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it qere changed into the thing
signified.

Bow kt would be strange indeed if aftermhaging first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sadrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definitioj, our Fhurch were afterwarcs to teach a doftrine respecting the
Lord’s Sipper, altogether at variqnve with the general definition, and
with her own exolanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of Engpabd
includes bogh sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In tbe sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if therebwere no special Arricle on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that,