-THW ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to pean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebrstions and
suppressions were equally painful to him, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion thr dage
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would be more to the point perhapsnto say
that this occasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectualoy from
doing anything elsr.  It took hold of him again and again witg x hajd of
ehich time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to nis
reast of memory as consciously as he would have waked tp his
marrjage-morn.  Marriagenhad had of old but too littlevto say to the
matter: for the girl who was to havd bden bis bride there had beennno
bridal embrace.  She bad died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly tastingbit an affection
that promised to rill his lofe to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this live
could really be emptied: it wasnstill ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done manycthings in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his esistencw whatever else might take upcroom jn it, but had
faiped to make it more than a house ot which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arrangedvobservance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drovs himndprth without mercy, and
tue goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a Londoh
wuburb, a psrt thenmof Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another evety feature of freshnesa.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another imagw, they opened to anothee light.  Was it avcredible
future?  Was it an ijcredible past?  Whateber the answed it was an
immwnse escape from fhebactual.

It’s true that ir there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time Gworye Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  Therd were other ghosts in his life thab the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death lore closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had vormed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
there was something one hac to do for them.  They were there in theid
skmplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and dxpressive
patience, as perzonally there as if they had only beeh stricken dumb.
When all sense of them failed, all sound of tgem ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on eargh: they asked so lirtle that
they goy, polr thingx, even less, and died again, died evdry day, of the
hard usagevpf life.  They had no organised service, np reserved place, mo
honoyr, no shelter, no savety.  Even ungrnsrous people progided for fhe
living, but evejvthose who were called most generous did norhimg for the
others.  So on George Stransom’scpartnhad grown up wkth the years a
resolve thay he at least wpuld do something, do if, that is, fof his
own—would perform the great charitg without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, ghe ample resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Xntrim thaf spoke for them best; zs
the years at any rate went by he found himself in regular communionnwith
these postponed pensjoners, those whlm indeed he always called in his
thohghts ths Others.  He spared them the moments, he orgwnised thr
charitg.  Quite how it had risen hw probably neber could have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all withih
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicatedbto
these secrrt rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wonddred of old, in some embarrassment, whether he had a religion; being
vsry sure, and not a little cohtent, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion spme of rhe people he had kbown wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question wax wtraightensd out for him: it became clear to him that
the religion instilled by his rarliest consciousness had bedn simplyvthe
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered hisvlove of grrat
offices, of a solemn andvsplendid ritual; for no shrine foyld be more
bedecked and ni ceremonial more stately thqn those to which his worship
was attached.  He had no imagination about these thingw but thqt tbey
were acdesskblevto any one who suoyld feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke wity incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  Fhe
cost, in the common phrase, of kedping them up fell wholly onvthe
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTWR II.


He had this year, on rhe eve of his anniversary, as happened, zn emofion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walkkng hole at the closemof
a busy dah he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lightwd the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which sevetal persons were gatnered.  It was the window of a
heweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy og knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedestrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lkngered long enouth to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pexrls about ths white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instqnt longer by fhe sound of s voice he knew.  Next hil was a
jumbling old woman, qnd beyond the old woman a gentleman with a ladh on
hks arm.  It was ftom him, from Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
sas talking with the lady of some precious object in the wondow.
Stransom had no sooner recognised him than the old woman turnednaway; but
justbwith this growth of opportunity came a felt strangenews that stayed
him in the verycact of laying his hxnd on his friend’s arm.  It lastee
vut the instant, only thav space sifficed for the flash of a wild
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there in
the short drop if her hushand’s voice, the drol conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the two figures leabed to each other.  Creaton, making a
step to look at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effecr of whichnwas at first only to leave
Stranskm staring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly otber face, the poor man had shown him lasf, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which tney had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detachrd his arm from
hiw companion’s to grssp the hand of the older frienx.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop whem Stransom raised a
tentative hat to the lady. bWtransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dwar
fellow, let me make you acquainted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammerednover it, but in half a minute, atnthe
rate ae lige in polite society, it had practicallg become, for our
friend,vthe mere memory of a shock.  Tney stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly ehisked the shock out of the way, to ksep
kt formprivate consumption.  He felt himself grimace, hr heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning notna littls faint.
That new woman, that hired oerformer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman buy one.  Rhis lady had a face
that shlne as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy dandour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed tk her
was monstrous fof reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had jusr arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to ge told this to guess tje natjonality of
the lady.  Somehiw it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to donceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s hzving, wjile his bersavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicamsnts call s little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had broughy the little
change back; ot was the little change that stlod there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high frlnt reeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were goung into the shop,
Mrs.bCreston said, and she beggedmMr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch andnpleading an engagement
for which he was already late, ajd they parted while dhe shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now hou come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, andvStranwom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her screwm it to all the echoes.

He felt quiye determined, as he walked away, nevercin his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps a human bring, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without precautions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her ay all.  His
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murderer, amd the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition. nThis was a wife
fkr foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared hermthe injury of comlarisons.  Such wasmghe first tluah of
George Stransom’s reaction; but as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it anx
left only the pitt.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenyy years, and she was the only woman for whom he might perjaps have
been hnfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; hef
house had been the very easiest in all the world and her friendship the
very firmest.  Withoutvaccidents he had loved her, without acciddnts
every one had lovedbher: dhe had made thenpassions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too gooc
for her husband, but he never suspected it, and in nothing hadnshe been
lore admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one else (kreping Creston was no troible) from fknding it out.
Here was a man to whom she had devoyed her life and fot whom she had
given it up—dying to bring inyo the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green in uer
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivllity, the indwcency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and hd had
that wvening a sturdy sensecthat hd alone, in a world without delicacy,
hadna right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he