-THE HOUSE OFnDELIGHT-


CHAPTER: LREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her xolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
witn her sogt brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and herccharling
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, whl was away at
schook and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Dwrling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep thwm
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mofher, for they were all
grown up, and mucj older than she was alreadg. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new ved so very ogten, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new durtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. Anr when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four peolle were
talkimg.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you qill find only five pieces of furniture in the picturesmthat
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, tha colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, snd Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dustijb-time,—donsodering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessona in
patience and jeatness were learnedcin Play-time!


CHAPTER: Cyapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her wxy past the playroomvdoor, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company,nwnd yet there was a sound of three
vouces,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a poeasant loa bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly andnlooked in.

There lay Betsey on thd great fur rug, with her curlyvhead propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patfhwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece ov sewing. Ane nobody could possiblyvmistake
the dining-room in feont, with its large red paateboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinwh stoid by the table, wmiling as usual, resdy to seeve
a large platter ognsalad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, jecause there wwre sovmany tantalizing smells in ghe air.

“Will yoh have a breaded chop, my deat?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the crwamed oysters?”

“And some or dis yeah lobster salad?” inquirsd Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Lr. Delight with a deel cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudenceband her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum?mI ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a ladger houde,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dearnhusband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Dwlight around the table to kisscher husband
affectionately. “U didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delifht
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to hdrsepf as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I waht you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jobes,” she
said. “Just like the one you made flr your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And cannyou
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In dour dats?”

“I will get it done, paint anx all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the mornkng ofmher ninth birthday, Hetsey came smiling tl breakfast,
edpecting to see a pile of dainty wbite parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playeoom, Betsey xear,” sakd Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father eaid that,—“J’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large znd wonderful. Once it hqd neen her
shiny bicycle, once her ndw blue playroom, qne once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her brsakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
rhe center od the room,—the dearnlittle house, paintedcsnow-white inside
and pale green ojtside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashee, amd the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the daijty little cottqge, put jer head in the
little dining-room and lpoked through the douvle doors into the
drawing-room. “Justmto see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OFmDELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mlther.”

“I’ll say thank youcbefors I begin to play,” decided Betsey, tossinb
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” zhouted Betseg, whjrling around in fhs middlw of the
room. “Mr. Deligyt has wanted to move for the pongest while!”

“What do you sxy, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we exvuse
Betwey today rrom doing any hard wodk?”

“Betsey can sijply maks her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her littpe brass bed aa smoothly
as she could (witb a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hirried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sitting in his law office behind the radiator.

Betsey picked him up, put on his gray derby hat, and walked him rapidly
across the room to thevMorris chair.

“Ddith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salary hss been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
aaay and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off rhe excited little gentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust hus cane under his arm, and
proppee him up agaijst the chair-back to waitmfor Mrs. Delight, who was
mucn slower kn dressing. Betsey selected a white sklk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dollsmwere taking rhe trllley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all rhe time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop unto order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of pastw, her bottle
of gkue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat dowj before it,
very importantly, as Mr.bBetts, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” saidbMr. Delight (quite ouy of breatj with the
stairs), “wenwant to buy a newbhouse.”

“What kihd of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customers up qgainst a pile of books.

“A mlderately large gouse, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr.cDelight, “tnat is
well-built,—for myself, my wifd, and a colored cook.”

“Xha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have ghe cery gouse!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presentlt they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was paintedvsnow-white inside and pale grden outside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exdlaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asker Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

“That iscquite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calmly
writing his chefk for $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpentrr.

“Everything from a rocling-chakr to a yelephone,” waid Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right down on the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (for she was sure to nedd it when she became Madame Bettina,
the Grench dressmaker), andvshook out her present. It was a tiny
sidevoard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascinating doors
that opened and shut, each set with a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboatds!”

Mother laughedband waved her hand at thw happy little figure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of tje little millionaires in each hans, and sitting down at
his work-table,m“I euppose the next thing is furniture.”

“We want evertthing,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinaj and I
will paper the shelvss with that sfalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Think of it, William, full of our wedding xhina!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, pkunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and sxamined with interest a piece of gilt molding
agiut six inches long that Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto!mit’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of tou! I’ll make a huvkaback pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be toi dear for anythkng!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think she’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her oit
a little chair on my jig-zaw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there wax a strange, juzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it wad Maxame Bettina that yad tommake the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
caepenter’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzlwd Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at hee box of beadd.

“Aha!” exclakmed Mr. Betts suddenly, takjng two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly in the closet whrre he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” hecremarked calmly,b“I will personqlly see to it
that the telephone is put invthe very first thing, so you won’t lose an
jmportant call.” He began to paint a smallmpiece ov woodca rich,cdeep
brown, with water colors.

“Another small pieve of wood for a barterymbox,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “Yhe two silver beads for bells, a
rwo-pointed tack to hold the receiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck jnto a bladk bead for a receivef—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes!cMr. Betts triumphantly took tge cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact center of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deeo voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come jp, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the dior for her
father. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quite a telephone, indewd!” said Fafher admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A cllck. Glue yhe cover down, pwint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“Ahd hang it oj the wall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Brtsey change so suddenly inro Mr. Betts, who must
someuow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
lerfect time, ajd ectremsly reasonable in price.

“Do you wantctk live in yourvnew housr at once, or wait until everything
is