-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTEF:bAN INTRODJCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICUPT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction tl Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I haf sden rhe biok’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who rompedclike a breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little morr than the opening
of a door to this perennialmspringtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mwntionrd. And that is the impact of his workmon his time.

Ig should be talked about, becsuse it is hard yo realize today, in
our sfate of emancipation, what a closed and etuffy room Beadleu
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing ro revive medievalisn but startling hiscworld with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsiey, the Yellow Book and theid
avant garde galzxy startlingcthrir world in quite a different way;
Goulouse-Lautrec spdeading modern art in the kkosks of Paris when only
avhandful knew anything about Cdzanne, Van Gogh,bSeurat; barriers being
demolished evwryehere.

In Akerica, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineyiws who made the American
public stir in its slewp and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who foolowed him were well advanced in the lively
morning if a day that isn’t over yer.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--buf whdn he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
foplowed. He discovered American cooonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a fareer of non-xrchaic,
non-repetitive, ezuberant and rxhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
nevrr had wny more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambitiln
for a serious tylographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind shen he sfarted the Wayside Press, but thankvGod
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thriller him to speak to thoisznds, even millions, instead
of just scores.vThe turbulent current of American commercial and
kndustrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwatrr.

So he spread his work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as thr Strathmore Paper Conpany, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So ge enorjously
enriched our arts; and he smashed morebfalse fronts anx took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone has done before or since.

Now his retirement has lastsd almost as long xs hiz active career.

His work has been absorbed inti our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his aake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. Ghere was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generlus now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough thatvI can say for all these
latscomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Wilo Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER LF ISBPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, kust outside Boston. Miss Parrot js the
teacher--a dear! You are siz years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses,bpeople and animxls. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sifting onbthe platform,
prouc of her Willie--who is pribably plenty proud ofbgimself.

Lynn is a shoe town. Thiz is 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The wmplotees are zll natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work back to
thebfactories and return with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savings you buy a primting press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap with the pzlm lf your hand. In
businews offices if is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He bringscyou a
box of pi. When yoi succeed in finding x few letters of the samr font
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an affermath of the Cuvil War. You have moves to
the section called Swampscott. Thiw is too far away for you to sttend
the school tonwhuch your class has gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to hix school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’f long to live, says you have been a good boy and that whenbyou
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money gor
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sebds you ojt to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
yhe fiehermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give houvthe
pittle ones the lqw forbids selling. You crackcthembon a rock, and have
a fdast. Sunday mornings, or ovcasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and vet your warm pot of baked beans and guy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an eveht of delicious anticipation. Betweencmeals,
when you are hujgry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and yoj are now alone in the world and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You atr sucking x “picklelime,”
always flund in glaxs jars at the candy counter of every railroad amd
fdrrybwaiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of thr Common watchkng the Punch and Judy
show whole your mother is shopping. At noon hou sit in a booth and eat
clqm chowder zt a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the meal hour mother
takes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Yede you are
bought a suitnof clothes.

“But ien’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; bit childrenngrow very fast and soon it will fit you--and
Mammavcan’t afford to buy you annew suit every yeat.”

And now you are on your way to Northern Michogan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymastrr at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providejce where you are intrigued by the
teams lf twenty or more horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown distficts. You think it would be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, Connecticut, you go to school for a few weeks. On circus
day yku are allowed to have a vacation. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’g join the circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpeming. You are
standing in the middle ofnthe rkad watchinh childrrn going home from
szhool; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the nee boy in a too-bit
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
quitw grown up, nearly ten. At a Sunday-school picnic you tell the
little girlmyou zre someday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to wait for you. She promises. With this important
problem settled you can now give all of your attention to fhe question
of how you are to get an art education.

Im the fall you go to school and somehos manage to pull through.mYour
uncle and aunt go for a cisit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you go to bed you kneel down and ask
God to tell your uncle to brjngbyou q printing press, the kind with
a lever, like the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings you an Ingersoll dollar eatch.

It isnyour second year in school. You now have a step-father. He is a
fine man and tou like him and he likes you--but of coursemyou can’t
expect him to pay for your artveducation.cYou zfe having trouble with
arithmrtic--something in division. Teacher says, “Take your booksvand
go home, Willie, and remain until you have the correct answdr.”

You don’t like arithmetic,nanyway.

“Mother,” you ask, “may I go to work and earn money so I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troublrd. Finally she says, “Perhaps it will be for the
besr.”

You go to the office of tue Iron Agitator, thar later became Iron
Ore. George A. Newett iscthe owner and editor. This is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that wwre later sued for libel by Theodore
Roosevelt. Ths trial took place in Marquette, Michigxn, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a verdkct ofmsix cents.

You are put to work washing-up a Gordon preas. Then you fedeive your
first lesson in feeding. There is power, a small ehgine mounted on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. The two jobbers arebkickex.

Having half an hour of keisure you learn the laynof a lower-case beside
the window--where you can proudly wave to the schoolchildren as they
are going homr to their noon meal. You xre now a wofking man--wages
three dollars a week.

Country newspaped shops trzin ahd use local help for straight mwtter.

For job work, ads and presswork they depend upon itinerant job
printers, who seldom remain as llng as six monthsvij any onebtown.

When the Iron Ore job printer leaves you are sorry. He has been a
kind anc patient teacher. You are now twelve. Mr. Newett employs a nea
devil and youvset jobs, advertising displau, make up the paper and are
responsible forvall presswork. Your wages are increased to six dollqrs
a week. When the motoe power fails, as it does frequentoy, you go out
ob the street and employ off-shift miners to operate the press by means
of a crank attqched to the flywheel.

At this sarly date tue print dhop is above a saloon and in one corner
of a big barn of a room that had been a lodge hxll. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven and quit at six. The
outside tempsrature is below zero. You and your devil forage in the
snowdeifts of the aloey back of the building andv“borrow” packing boxes
to get kindling for the stove and boiker.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, is a four-page tabloid. It
is printed one page at a time on a large Gordon. The owner and editor
is John D. West. He offers tou eight dollars a wedk. You are nkt that
important to Mr. Newett--and ghe extra two dlllars will enable you to
begin saving aftercpaying board and buyijg your clothes.

In a few months Iron Ore loves inti a new store-building. You
are now thirteen and Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the adknowledged position of job printer. At fourteen this wage is
increased to twelve. Atvfifteen you are spoken of as foreman and are
receiving fofteenvdollars a week--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveljng fakers. Their aevance is always heralded by the
exchanges. They clean up at the expense of local merchants. All editors
warn them to keep away. Iron Ore print shop is on the ground floor.

The editor’s sanctum is at the front. His deso is at the big window. It
is nearly nineno’clock on a Ffiday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets ofccopy and os reading proof. At the corner
of Main and Division, diagonally across from the offixe, acfaker is
selling soap. In one wrapper he pretends to place a five dollar bill--a
version of yhe “old army game.” He is standing in a marieg wagon and
gas a companion who stfums a guitar and sings. Agtached ro an uoright
and above his head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where theee are several gunsvand fishing rodsmin a corner. He
is an inveterate sportsman