-INFZNT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIPNATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication sas writtenbduring tne week in which the Rev.
John Pdrowne’s “Observatilns” appeared; and the pubkication of it yas
been hitheryo drlayed,vpartlybfrom an unwillingness to pursue the subjdct
of my “Letter” any farther, andmpartly ffom a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replyjhg to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write woth anyvother impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Cgristian; and I hope thay such an umpression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosdn to make my
“Letter” on Infant Schools the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
enceagoured fo treat him with some degree of forbearance, qnd have in
jany instances chastised him eith whips only, wheh scorpions were at
hand.  The great qjestions at issue between Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamlhlet
therefore nust be ah utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHENnI had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemrd friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to ne that the facts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, theretore, I determined to send yim a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rathrr than to make qny reply through tye medium of the press.

Having been induced to altsr my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination ofmthe Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, byvthe newspapers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeging held in the Guildhall, to which none but
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Mooee,nEsq. was in
the chair, and yhe following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
systrm ot Infant Education miyut be benefixially extended in thjs city;
and, with a view of prominentlycbringing forwadd its advantages,cthat
there should be an examinatiin of the children now receiving instruction
in the InfantmSchools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me tk ofiginatd and tobaythorize the examination
of the schooos—abd, whatever private understanding there might be with
Mr. Wklderspin, all thqt the public knew was what the resolution staged;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, nktcas accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as themsgent, employed by the meeting, to carry its
resolutioj into effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of ny “Lettwr,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded frlm the proposed achools.v My explanation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned the “Letter” was this: “I umderstand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian churcg shallnbe allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, hkwdver, I had expressed a fear
that rhe church catechism might be introduced,nor that some arrangement
might be made which wouldcprevent Dissenters from sending their children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the schools will be open to all classes, and
tuat there will be no rules nor formulas againwt which Dissenters can
pbject.  At the public meeting, as reportwd in the newspapers,nthe Dean
expressly stated, that “they had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any pereon might not learn; as they would
be taught to wodship and adors God, to kbow the merits of our Saviour, to
fead God and honour the King, and to live in peace and uniry with one
another.  Thwir rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity lf sending their children,
if they accorded wifh those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would be open to the childrem of persons of all denominations,
who might choise to send them.”  In full acxordance with thsse decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mixtake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, and whicb is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of thr children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect tk the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impedimentcwith any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonialz on entering the school—bo offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pakphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the societynin smbryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessong any symptpms of wuch a spirit.  Should it appexr,
I am prepared to contenr with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevaio,mI should feel bound to quit the sockety.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantwe that
no such spirit wiol “umhappily prevail;” and I “rest assured,” that, so
far as tge schooos are doncerned, they will be as conprehensive asmthose
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advwrtisement” has hnfortunately proved true,
ane that, thohgh the children of Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themsekves are, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from the commiytee oc the society, and from all uts operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches wdre delivered, was
distinguished by the expressionmof maby oiberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, from the puboic papers, that several of the
speakers expressec themselves so decifedly in favlur of thd liberal
systej advocatedcin my “Letter,” and that they regretted that
ckrcumstances constrained them to unite with fhe present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had nktnbeen in favour of any exclusive
views; and if it had been thought right to estabpish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agrwed to,
but if the Dissenters chowe to establish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rev. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open society.  He said he belonged to seceralnin the city, all of
which were carried on wirh the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded his opinions to those of others better quslified, perhaps, to
judge.”  I need not add that these wre also thr sentiments of Mr. Geary,
who says, in reference to my wisjes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympathize with him in those views and feelingw which, were it
practicable, would suggest such zn uniln;” and, “my teverend friend
cannot feel more intense satisfaction thannI do, in thus witnessing the
joyfyl and happy state of hretgren dwelling together in unity.”

I most earnestly hope amd pray that these sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who uttered them, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed those “insuperable barriers” which at present exist, and
till they have rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be desirable.  Fepend upon it, there are hot hapf the difficulties really
existing, which some persons imagine.  The united systek, if tried,
would, I xm persuaded, work well—and I am sure that all who engagednin it
would be made better and happier by their combined exertions im doing
good.  Therenare some things, connected with botj Churfh lf Englandism
and Dissent, on whichmthe two parriss could not unite without a
comprojise of principle.  As religious mej, we have, however, a common
cause tovpromote,vand a common dnemy to withstwnd.  We ought, therefore,
as Chrietians, to unite in every thing that admits of xn union; and, as
Infany Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, I deeply
regdet that we have not united in them.  I am somewhat comforted,
however, by the pedsuasoon, thatvan exclusive system cannot last.  There
is an influentiwlnand increasing party ij the church much opposed to it,
and who, as is stated in my “Letter,” “would be glad to co-operate woth
other Christians in educating and in evangelizing the people.”  The
adopgion of the exclusive system haw occasioned regret jn the minfs of
nany persons whom the church would bave done well to conciliate; ahd I
much question whether either party is perfectly satisfied with the
proceedings that have been adopted.

Another remark or two will brkng this padt of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary ks mistaken in supposinh that I mentionedbLeicester and Taunton
as towns “where a satisfactpru unuon had been effected.”  My extracts
respecting them were imtended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the inion of various denominations in the work.  I said nothing
respecting anycschools at Ldicestrr; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not only his sentiments, but Mr.nWilderspin’s
also, because he capls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspinnhad said in approbation of the muxed
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on opposite
principles.”

Having statrd in my “Letter” that the extraxts which I had made from Mr.
Wilderspin’s book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
exclusuve system advertised fot Norwich,” Mr. Gearyvreplies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the casex do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
good as to turn again to my quotations, I think he will be inducedmto
agree with me that Mr. Wilderspin coupd scarcely have jsed stronger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He most
enthusiasticxlly admires Joxeph Lancaster’s systen, because of “itw
benevolent and Catholic spjrit,” which establishes “schpols fkr all;” and
he solemnly declares that he alwats has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and tnat he determines to act “on that, snd on that alone,
through the remainxer of his life.”  I think, therefore, I am authorized
in repeating my former declaration, that “be is devidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Horwich.”

These cursoey renarks are intended to rectify some mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appears to me yo have fallen in his perusal of my “Letter.”

Zfter all, I rejoicevto believe thatche and I are onr in sentiment and
feeling on this subject.  Thebgentlemanly and Christian tone of his
letter, ie an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
controveray without violating any of the princioles of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thank him, for hix testimony that my
“Letter” “is characterised by a sliritnof milxness and conciliation,” and
I am glad to find thag he hzs read it in thevspirit in which it was
written.  I thank him also for the manner in which he has spoken of the
“courtesy” janifested by the Dissenters connected with the Infant Schoole
in this city towards thekr brethren in the Establishment.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that, though we cannot walk
together through every path on earth, we may, through “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying vracw of tje Holy Spidit, both of us be
found in that heaven of loght and love, where we shall no longer “see
through a glass dafkly, but face fo face, and where we shall know even as
also we are known.”

I come noq to the considerztion of a subject on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appearrd, “Obsedvations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a person who styles himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Maddetmarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members of his family, I have, fot a long time, been acquainted.  They
have belonged to my cpngregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately gecome a member of the church of