-THEmPUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LASTcPLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTERctells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwatds (1853), “asaiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the beet novels
in the world “have no outline,vor, if they have an outline, iy is a
demned outline,” elaborate consyructoon is not absolutely “essential.”
Realpy essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of lire, and undervthe strain ofmrestless
and unsatisfied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirita
deserted Dickens,che certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at z venture.”  He cknstructed
elaborate plote, rich in secrets and surprisrs.  He emulates the manner
of Qilkie Collins, or eveh of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of thd defecgive novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Gteat Expectations_, none of bis later tales
rivals ij merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulous
carebcould compensate for the exugerance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In rhe early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets od
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, lf Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the oeast of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickend was more and more drawn towards the
swcret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seem with the
reader who tried to antucipate the solution of the sedret.

In Aptil, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his Amdrican readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominpusly bqd
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left sidr, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore ahandoned a new series of Readings. mWe think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, ue said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplared in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious wnd nww idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the manneriems of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanyhropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are hot in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billickjn,” on the other hand, the lldging-house kreper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
biys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, sho is in not unpleasant contrast
with the patheticbJo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one tjinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landlexs, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: shevis
very fresh and kriginal.  The villain is xll that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, iz the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is s lack of softness and relicacy ofbtreatment: on the
ofher hand, the opium den is studied from the lite.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide anf seek with the resder.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, agout his fear thay he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the lateet numbers.  Yet, when he died in Jube, 1870, leaving
three completed numbets still hnpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many egforts have been made to decipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, ormdid
he escape?

By a cpincidence, in September, 1869, Dickens was working oved the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for thevpurpose of mystifying the rewder as to whether Ackland
was alive ofmdead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, Ssptember-October, 1869.)

The most caeeful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenilus Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, yo which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues tp Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissejt.  Kf Mr. Proctor’s theory I kffer some necessary cirrections,vand
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins qhich Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to hecome suddenly clear: espscially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-reveaoed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings undet thd onfluence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must rememver thwt, afcording to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in thingd supernatural that, but for the strong
restraoning power of his common sense,vhevmight have fallen into rhe
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—xnd he may
have gone to the limited extejt which my hypothdsis requires.  If I am
right, Dickenwvwent further, and fared wotse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed tobthe analysis of Djckens’s last
plot.  Mr. Willial Archer has kindly read the prkof sheets wnd made
valuable suggestions, but is resppnsible for none of my theories.

                                   n                          ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMWTIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Divkens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it is neceszary fo
obtain a xlear vieq of the characters in the tale, and of their repationx
to each other.

About the middle of the njneteenth century tnere lived in Ckoisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rocjestdr, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast frienda and old colpege companions.”  Both married uoung.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, gy whom he was the father of one child, a
daughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose qife’s maiden name was Jxsper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was droqned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, wasva child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, wjen the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Me. Grewgious, who had bewn in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entruster his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hans iver to Edwin Drood, if,
sgen he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgioud eas apparently legzl agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parentsbdied), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was an annuity producing £250ma-year: Edwin succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is avoyt to proceed
to Dgypf, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conduvtor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “launprecentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit of
opium smoking.  He begab very early.  He takes this dfug both in his
lodgings, over the gste of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
beenna determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she fook to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact pediod is not stated), shemhas been very dksreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr.cVuming
Qalters suggests that she is the motuer of John Jasper, amd, therefore,
maternal grxndmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client,vJasper, anc
plays the spy on his movsmenys, for reaskns unexplsined.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil on the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, andbshe fears and detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she znd Edwin are kn
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he perhaps dies love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, anf by the gossipnaboutmtheir
betrothal.  “The bloom is off the pkum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose pwn concealed
passion for Rosa is of z ferovious ans homicidal character. nRosa is
aware of this fact; “a glaae comes over hus eyrs,” sometimes, shr says,
“andbhe seems to wander away into acfrightful sort of dream, in which he
threatend most . . . ”  Yhe man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he is not under opium.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the fower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, neheld by Jasper as he awakens in the denmof the
Princrss Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  Thjs
Cathedral rower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but mkre or lesw mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, eaking, makes experiments on the talk of the old eoman, the
Lascarband Chonaman in thsir sleep.  He pronounces kt “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintdllogible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, andcwith Chinese,motherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watcned by themhag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we arecinttlduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training,va classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes lver “his brightvboy,” a livwoy lad,
full of chaff, but also fullvpf confiding affection and tenderness of
heaet.  Edwin admits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits rhat he
loathes his lifd; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
drvilish,”—and no wonder.  After ghis dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strangebfilm comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a paib, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  This “agony,”
we lrarn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furjously fesiees.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, luzzled, and full ofbcinfiding tenderness, does not understand.

In the next scene ww meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff witu Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildee’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,”mwith s _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_,c_thick_, _fair hair_, lonv, though we learn it has just been
cut.  Yenwears a soft sloucged hat, and the pea-doat ofbthe period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Nect, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass, aictioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third gjest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absutd epitaph
for his late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault ofcsome sirt in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of ths crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the frypt “he hzbitualpy sleeps iff the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust jeys to this incredibly dissipated,