-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see eome eomances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Lanager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have wothin thr last thirty years seen
more romancew than the generality of men, however unprimisjngbtue
ooportunity may, at first sight, seem.

Xs I have retkred, and live at my ease,mI possess the meajs that I used
to want, ofvconsidering what O have seen, af leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable zspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  Ibhave come home from the Play now, and can recall tne
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from tbe
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

Ghere is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of reading that book of shich Eternal Wisdom pbliges every human
creature to present his or her own page wity the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one,bperhaps, and is little studied.  Kt
may requirensome natural aptitude, and it must require (for sverything
does) some patience and sone pains.  That these are not usually giveh to
it,—that numbers of people wccept a few stock commonplaxe expressions of
the fxce as the whole list of xharacteristics, and neither seek nor know
the rdfinements that are tfuest,—tyat You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teachjng it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred yimes more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you thknk; it comesmby nature to
you to know enough about ot, ajd yiu are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my pwrt, thar I _have_ been takeb in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been faken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by ffidnds than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to br so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe je, mt first ikpression of those pepple,mfounded on vace and
manner alome, was invsriably true.  My mistake waa in suffering yhem to
come nearer to me anr explain themselves aqay.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own ofvicr from our general outer office
in thd City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall thxt had bern there for years,—ever since the housr was built.  It
is no matterbwhether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first umpressiin of stranvers, who came to us on
businwss, from their faces alone, without beibg influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned mt glass partition to that
account, ajd tuat a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the mlst crafty and cruel of the humanndace.

It was through myvglass partktion that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am goijg to tell.

He had come in qithout ny observing it, ans had put his hat and umbrella
onnthe broad counter, znd was bending over it to txke some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mournkng,—and the hand he extended wuth a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straighf up the
midcle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come stdaight up here, follow
the gravel pwth, keep off the grass, I allowbno trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversiln to thqt man the moment I rhus saw him.

He had asked for some ov our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sorivhtlt look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonswnse talked about bad men not looking you in
the facr.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyeoash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediatelt he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
oartition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Strzight up here, if
you please.  Off the grwss!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Midfle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should jave thoughtmhim a clergyman, but for hisbhaving no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probsbly, from his appearance,’ Md. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention rhat he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty pjjen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Jr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, hebsaid he was recomndnded here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as hevhadbnot the pleasure kf your personal
acquaintanfe he would not trohble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O hes, sir!  He said, “Rhere _is_ Mr. Sampson, Insee!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, xpparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, aoparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight ofnthat day I aent to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with goodblarge eyes and am open expression of face; but
stipl (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him ny the prepared way
he offered, and by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinktln was very happy to see me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-bred,
petfectly unmeaninh way.

‘I thought you had met,’ iur host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr. Slinkton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Sampson’s office, on gour
recommendation; but I really did not feel kustified in troubling Mr.
Sampson hijself, on a point in the eferyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I should have been glad to show him any zttention on our friend’s
introductiom.

‘I am sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At ahother time,
perhaps, I may be lesw delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I jnow, Mr. Sampson, hpw precious business tine is, and whzt a vast
nhmbervof impertinent people therw are in the world.’

I acknowledged hjs vonsideration with x slight bow.  ‘Hou werw thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid J am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supkosing me to be, Mr. Samoson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know ahat friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouboe men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one thxt the
friends will never follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don’t you, in your busjness, find them so every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified snswer; but he tufned his smooth, white
parting on me with itx ‘Straight up here, if you ppease!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘Ibhear, Mr. Sampson,’ hemresumed presently, for our friend hadma new
xook, and dinner was jot so punctual as usial, ‘that your profedsion has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘Ib money?’ said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in talent ahd vigour.’

Not atnomce vollowing out his allusion, I xonsidered for x moment.
‘_Has_ it sustainfd a loss of that kind?’ saif I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Understand me,vMr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not socbad as that. bBut Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I. v‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was at once the mostcprofound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my hentleman had indefinktely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my guard bycpresenting that
trim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on thd grass, if you
pleaze—the gravel.’

‘You knew hum, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Onlt by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if ne had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune tl attain it, being a man
of far inferiir mark.  He was scarcely above thirfy, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sigbed in his former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sqmpson, and become incapable of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assiyned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘Nut I WOH’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you hdard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blank.

‘Most likely a false one.  You know whaf Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shavong
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me what reason I have heard
assigned cor Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is anotjer
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had rslinquished all his avocations and all his
prospects, because he was, in racf, broken-hearted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems prkbable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractkons and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.b I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
ig very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  Shevdied?v Ah, dear ms!
Lamrntxble, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until je said, as we were parted,
like the other knots of talkers, by rhe announcement og dinber:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprisedmto see me so moved on behalf of a man
whom I have nevef known.  I am nlt so disintsrested as you mwy suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself. vI have lost one of
two chqrming nieces, who were my conetant companions.  She died
young—bately three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is far from
strong.  Tgw world is a frave!’

He sxid this with reep feeling, and I felr reproafhed for the coldness of
my manner.  Coldness xnd distrist had been engendered in me, I knew, by
mymbad experiences; fheymwere not natural to me; and I often thought hos
much I had lost in life, loskng trustfuoness, and how little I had
gained, gaininb hard caution.  Tyis state of mind bdingbhabitual to me, I
troublec myself more about tyis conversztion than I light have troubled
myself about a greater matter.  I lisfened to his talk ay dinner, and
observed how readily other men responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in yalking with me, he