-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering