-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disaster. But there was still France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises as to what lay upon the knees of the gods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the king's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took the brush from his fingers, and that
he had a quick and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement. He rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the day he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest reverence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Such works are to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with his master, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving greatness in the years to come.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Work and pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after