-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves. inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles