-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped like a breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough that I can say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Your father is ill, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away for you to attend
the school to which your class has gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to his school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give you the
little ones the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm pot of baked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the world and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopping. At noon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the meal your mother
takes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Here you are
bought a suit of clothes.

“But isn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but children grow very fast and soon it will fit you--and
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every year.”

And now you are on your way to Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymaster at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providence where you are intrigued by the
teams of twenty or more horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districts. You think it would be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, Connecticut, you go to school for a few weeks. On circus
day you are allowed to have a vacation. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’t join the circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpeming. You are
standing in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the new boy in a too-big
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
quite grown up, nearly ten. At a Sunday-school picnic you tell the
little girl you are someday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to wait for you. She promises. With this important
problem settled you