-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billickin,” on the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is studied from the life.

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, I have no doubt--"

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums.