-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped like a breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and their
avant garde galaxy startling their world in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anything about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

So he spread his work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; and he smashed more false fronts and took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone has done before or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active career.

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough that I can say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who is probably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work back to
the factories and return with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap with the palm of your hand. In
business offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
box of pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away for you to attend
the school to which your class has gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to his school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give you the
little ones the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm pot of baked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the world and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is