-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in his book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, a modern traveler, says
the inhabitants of Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the remembrance of the deliverance of the children of Israel
from their bondage in Egypt. Diodorus, the most renowned Greek historian,
who employed thirty years epitomizing the libraries, and traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Egyptian priests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquainted with the ancient
mythicals, can regard the religion of the Bible as a child of mythical
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upon those myths, and all
mythical worship, as it could be made by an infinite mind.

Voltaire says “the character of the mythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the son of Ouranos, or Saturn, son of Heaven, in the
beginning slew his father, and possessed himself of his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in the same way, he preferred
devouring his children, but Curetes, a subordinate god, by craft, conveyed
Jupiter away in secret and afterwards bound his brother with chains, and
divided the empire, Jupiter receiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Pluto and Jupiter are all set forth
in the mythical writings as adulterers. Jupiter was regarded as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as guilty in many
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he assumed wings and
proved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by his three nights, sung
by the poets for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and destroyed the many-headed Hydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up from hades the
three-headed dog, Cerberus; effectually cleansed the Augean stable from
its refuse; killed the bulls and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was delighted with being stunned by the cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and to be
conquered with the love of women; and at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the origin of our religion in the
old mythical system, can bridge across this chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. There is no analogy between these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
which is divided up and parceled out among them. Their morals were the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Homer introduces Zeus in love, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stinging arrow felt when that same son of Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierced with pain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupiter groaning he came. The bitter shaft
remained deep in his shoulder fixed, and grieved his soul.” In the
mythical system the gods are not presented as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning generated from the waters of the
ocean, and thousands were added by deifying departed heroes and
philosophers. The thought of one supreme Intelligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to our God, in our scriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true character. They even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that a man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinity, it may be, and then
become worse by their reflex action upon his own nature.” This was
verified in the ancient mythical religion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“The character of all the gods was simply human character extended in all
its powers, appetites, lusts and passions. Scholars say there is no
language containing words that express the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they have been translated. These attributes must be known in
order to salvation from sin, so God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure religion, as a standard of right and wrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient nations of the earth gives a united testimony
that their original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshiped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yet in the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one supreme
in power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generation after the flood. The
evidence of this is given by Plato from one of the ancient poets in these
words: “It was the generation then the tenth, of men endowed with
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon the men of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reigned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, because of men endowed with gift of
speech, they were the first,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for their strength, as Heracles and Perseus, and others for their
art. Those to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselves assuming it, obtained the


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walking home at the close of
a busy day he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gathered.  It was the window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy of knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedestrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lingered long enough to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pearls about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instant longer by the sound of a voice he knew.  Next him was a
mumbling old woman, and beyond the old woman a gentleman with a lady on
his arm.  It was from him, from Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
was talking with the lady of some precious object in the window.
Stransom had no sooner recognised him than the old woman turned away; but
just with this growth of opportunity came a felt strangeness that stayed
him in the very act of laying his hand on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
but the instant, only that space sufficed for the flash of a wild
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there in
the short drop of her husband’s voice, the drop conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the two figures leaned to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effect of which was at first only to leave
Stransom staring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly other face, the poor man had shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which they had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
his companion’s to grasp the hand of the older friend.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop when Stransom raised a
tentative hat to the lady.  Stransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dear
fellow, let me make you acquainted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, he heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman but one.  This lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s having, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had brought the little
change back; it was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front teeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

He felt quite determined, as he walked away, never in his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps a human being, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without precautions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her at all.  His
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murderer, and the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
for foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared her the injury of comparisons.  Such was the first flush of
George Stransom’s reaction; but as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it and
left only the pity.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenty years, and she was the only woman for whom he might perhaps have
been unfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; her
house had been the very easiest in all the world and her friendship the
very firmest.  Without accidents he had loved her, without accidents
every one had loved her: she had made the passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspected it, and in nothing had she been
more admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one else (keeping Creston was no trouble) from finding it out.
Here was a man to whom she had devoted her life and for whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green on her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivolity, the indecency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and he had
that evening a sturdy sense that he alone, in a world without delicacy,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he