-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to point out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that,


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie