-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: -Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Betsey, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sitting in his law office behind the radiator.

Betsey picked him up, put on his gray derby hat, and walked him rapidly
across the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salary has been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited little gentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his cane under his arm, and
propped him up against the chair-back to wait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much slower in dressing. Betsey selected a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dolls were taking the trolley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all the time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantly, as Mr. Betts, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight (quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customers up against a pile of books.

“A moderately large house, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Delight, “that is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was painted snow-white inside and pale green outside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calmly
writing his check for $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpenter.

“Everything from a rocking-chair to a telephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right down on the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (for she was sure to need it when she became Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook out her present. It was a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascinating doors
that opened and shut, each set with a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved her hand at the happy little figure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “I suppose the next thing is furniture.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Think of it, William, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long that Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of you! I’ll make a huckaback pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think she’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strange, buzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, taking two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly in the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remarked calmly, “I will personally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very first thing, so you won’t lose an
important call.” He began to paint a small piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, with water colors.

“Another small piece of wood for a battery box,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold the receiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact center of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deep voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the door for her
father. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quite a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock. Glue the cover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“And hang it on the wall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who must
somehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect time, and extremely reasonable in price.

“Do you want to live in your new house at once, or wait until everything
is