-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
who through door this a the, feel, little for breeze freshness
springtime graphic gaiety my of I be vitality part more perennial
I--of here the several like have opening man should to than decades that
courage this arts romped and encountered a American.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and their
avant garde galaxy startling their world in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anything about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the well in
who day the is of and the n’t morning over were him followed
a advanced yet many that henext decade lively.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

So he spread his work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; and he smashed more false fronts and took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone has done before or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough that I can say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who is probably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is shoe a town. This is 1875. Most is work done of by the hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work back to
the factories and return with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap with the palm of your hand. In
business offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your for perhaps is
the cartoons a Daily father--daily drawing Lynn Item. He brings you a
box of pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This away school is too to your which far
class for attend to has the you gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A takes to you playmate his school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They you little law
ones the give forbids the selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday the, of on warm a baker brown, baked of
get pot eventloaf occasionally mornings Saturday to bread beans or of a night your an ’s
buy-you--delicious and and go always anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your the you on you the now are on Gauge mother in and Narrow are
“alone world” way your to and Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopping. At noon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the meal your mother
takes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Here you are
bought a suit of clothes.

“But isn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but children grow very fast and soon it will fit you--and
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every year.”

And now you are on your way to Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymaster at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En Providence cars at by the twenty that downtown route stop through
teams you of or more intrigued where pull the are you freight
horses districts. You think it would be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, school, you to Connecticut for a few go weeks. On circus
day you are allowed to have a vacation. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’t join the circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpeming. You are
standing in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the new boy in a too-big
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
quite grown up, nearly ten. At a Sunday-school picnic you tell the
little girl you are someday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to wait for you. She promises. With this important
problem settled you can now give all of your attention to the question
of how you are to get an art education.

In the fall you go to school and somehow manage to pull through. Your
uncle and aunt go for a visit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you go to bed you kneel down and ask
God to tell your uncle to bring you a printing press, the kind with
a lever, like the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings you an Ingersoll dollar watch.

It is your second year in school. You now have a step-father. He is a
fine man and you like him and he likes you--but of course you can’t
expect him to pay for your art education. You are having trouble with
arithmetic--something in division. Teacher says, “Take your books and
go home, Willie, and remain until you have the correct answer.”

You don’t like arithmetic, anyway.

“Mother,” you ask, “may I go to work and earn money so I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troubled. Finally she says, “Perhaps it will be for the
best.”

You go to the office of the Iron Agitator, that later became Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor. This is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that were later sued for libel by Theodore
Roosevelt. The trial took place in Marquette, Michigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a verdict of six cents.

You are put to work washing-up a Gordon press. Then receive you first
in lesson your feeding. There is power, a small engine mounted on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. The two jobbers are kicked.

Having their to the half beside home lay proudly a to schoolchildren case-you the
learn they--wave as are an hour you noon window of the
of can going lower leisure where meal. You are now a working man--wages
three dollars a week.

Country newspaper shops train and use local help for straight matter.

For job work, ads and presswork they depend upon itinerant job
printers, who seldom remain as long as six months in any one town.

When the Iron Ore job printer leaves you are sorry. He and has patient
kind a been teacher. You are now twelve. Mr. Newett employs a new
devil and you set jobs, advertising display, make up the paper and are
responsible for all presswork. Your wages are increased to six dollars
a week. When the motor power fails, as it does frequently, you go out
on the street and employ off-shift miners to operate the press by means
of a crank attached to the flywheel.

At this early date the print shop is above a saloon and in one corner
of a big barn of a room that had been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven and quit at six. The
below is temperature outside zero. You and your devil forage in the
snowdrifts of the alley back of the building and “borrow” packing boxes
to get kindling for the stove and boiler.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, is a four-page tabloid. It
is printed one page at a time on a large Gordon. The owner and editor
is John D. West. He offers you eight dollars a week. You are not that
important to Mr. Newett--and the extra two dollars will enable you to
begin saving after paying board and buying your clothes.

In a Ore new Iron few moves store months into a-building. You
are now thirteen and Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the acknowledged position of job printer. At fourteen this wage is
increased to twelve. At fifteen you are spoken of as foreman and are
receiving fifteen dollars a week--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveling fakers. Their is heralded the always by advance
exchanges. They clean up at the expense of local merchants. All keep
warn editors to them away. Iron Ore print shop is on the ground floor.

The editor’s sanctum is at the front. His desk is at the big window. It
is nearly nine o’clock on a Friday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets of copy and is reading proof. At the corner
of Main and Division, diagonally across from the office, a faker is
selling soap. In one wrapper he pretends to place a five dollar bill--a
version of the “old army game.” He is standing in a market wagon and
has a companion who strums a guitar and sings. Attached to an upright
and above his head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where there are several guns and fishing rods in a corner.