-SOME ROUND-ABOUT PAPERS-


CHAPTER: ON SOME CARP AT SANS SOUCI


WE have lately made the acquaintance of an old lady of ninety, who has
passed the last twenty-five years of her old life in a great metropolitan
establishment, the workhouse, namely, of the parish of Saint Lazarus.
Stay—twenty-three or four years ago, she came out once, and thought to
earn a little money by hop-picking; but being overworked, and having to
lie out at night, she got a palsy which has incapacitated her from all
further labour, and has caused her poor old limbs to shake ever since.

An illustration of that dismal proverb which tells us how poverty makes
us acquainted with strange bed-fellows, this poor old shaking body has to
lay herself down every night in her workhouse bed by the side of some
other old woman with whom she may or may not agree.  She herself can’t be
a very pleasant bed-fellow, poor thing! with her shaking old limbs and
cold feet.  She lies awake a deal of the night, to be sure, not thinking
of happy old times, for hers never were happy; but sleepless with aches,
and agues, and rheumatism of old age.  “The gentleman gave me
brandy-and-water,” she said, her old voice shaking with rapture at the
thought.  I never had a great love for Queen Charlotte, but I like her
better now from what this old lady told me.  The Queen, who loved snuff
herself, has left a legacy of snuff to certain poorhouses; and, in her
watchful nights, this old woman takes a pinch of Queen Charlotte’s snuff,
“and it do comfort me, sir, that it do!”  _Pulveris exigui munus_.  Here
is a forlorn aged creature, shaking with palsy, with no soul among the
great struggling multitude of mankind to care for her, not quite trampled
out of life, but past and forgotten in the rush, made a little happy, and
soothed in her hours of unrest by this penny legacy.  Let me think as I
write.  (The next month’s sermon, thank goodness! is safe to press.)
This discourse will appear at the season when I have read that
wassail-bowls make their appearance; at the season of pantomime, turkey
and sausages, plum-puddings, jollifications for schoolboys; Christmas
bills, and reminiscences more or less sad and sweet for elders.  If we
oldsters are not merry, we shall be having a semblance of merriment.  We
shall see the young folks laughing round the holly-bush.  We shall pass
the bottle round cosily as we sit by the fire.  That old thing will have
a sort of festival too.  Beef, beer, and pudding will be served to her
for that day also.  Christmas falls on a Thursday.  Friday is the
workhouse day for coming out.  Mary, remember that old Goody Twoshoes has
her invitation for Friday, 26th December!  Ninety is she, poor old soul?
Ah! what a bonny face to catch under a mistletoe!  “Yes, ninety, sir,”
she says, “and my mother was a hundred, and my grandmother was a hundred
and two.”

Herself ninety, her mother a hundred, her grandmother a hundred and two?
What a queer calculation!

Ninety!  Very good, granny: you were born, then, in 1772.

Your mother, we will say, was twenty-seven when you were born, and was
born therefore in 1745.

Your grandmother was thirty-five when her daughter was born, and was born
therefore in 1710.

We will begin with the present granny first.  My good old creature, you
can’t of course remember, but that little gentleman for whom you mother
was laundress in the Temple was the ingenious Mr Goldsmith, author of a
“History of England,” the “Vicar of Wakefield,” and many diverting
pieces.  You were brought almost an infant to his chambers in Brick
Court, and he gave you some sugar-candy, for the doctor was always good
to children.  That gentleman who well-nigh smothered you by sitting down
on you as you lay in a chair asleep was the learned Mr S. Johnson, whose
history of “Rasselas” you have never read, my pour soul; and whose
tragedy of “Irene” I don’t believe any man in these kingdoms ever
perused.  That tipsy Scotch gentleman who used to come to the chambers
sometimes, and at whom everybody laughed, wrote a more amusing book than
any of the scholars, your Mr Burke and your Mr Johnson, and your Dr
Goldsmith.  Your father often took him home in a chair to his lodgings;
and has done as much for the stuff in Bond Street, the famous wit.
Of course, my good creature, you remember the Gordon Riots, and crying No
Popery before Mr Langdale’s house, the Popish distiller’s, and that bonny
fire of my Lord Mansfield’s books in Bloomsbury Square?  The stuff, what a
heap of illuminations you have seen! For the glorious victory over the
Americans at a thing; for the peace in 1814, and the beautiful
Chinese bridge in the thing; for the coronation of his Majesty,
whom you recollect as Prince of Wales, Goody, don’t you?  Yes; and you
went in a procession of laundresses to pay your respects to his good
lady, the injured Queen of England, at Brandenburg House; and you
remember your mother told you how she was taken to see the Scotch lords
executed at the Tower.  And as for your grandmother, she was born five
months after the battle of Malplaquet, she was; where her poor father was
killed, fighting like a bold Briton for the Queen.  With the help of a
“Wade’s Chronology,” I can make out ever so queer a history for you, my
poor old body, and a pedigree as authentic as many in the peerage-books.

Peerage-books and pedigrees?  What does she know about them? Battles and
victories, treasons, kings, and beheadings, literary gentlemen, and the
like, what have they ever been to her? Granny, did you ever hear of
General Wolfe?  Your mother may have seen him embark, and your father may
have carried a musket under him.  Your grandmother may have cried huzza
for Marlborough; but what is a thing to you, and did you ever so
much as hear tell of his name?  How many hundred or thousand of years had
that toad lived who was in the coal at the defunct exhibition?—and yet he
was not a bit better informed than toads seven or eight hundred years
younger.

“Don’t talk to me your nonsense about a thing, and Prince Dukes, and
toads in coals, or coals in toads, or what is it?” says granny.  “I know
there was a good Queen Charlotte, for she left me snuff; and it comforts
me of a night when I lie awake.”

To me there is something very touching in the notion of that little pinch
of comfort doled out to granny, and gratefully inhaled by her in the
darkness.  Don’t you remember what traditions there used to be of chests
of plate, bulses of diamonds, laces of inestimable value, sent out of the
country privately by the old Queen, to enrich certain relatives in
M-ckl-nb-rg Str-l-tz?  Not all the treasure went.  _Non omnis moritur_.
A poor old palsied thing at midnight is made happy sometimes as she lifts
her shaking old hand to her nose.  Gliding noiselessly among the beds
where lie the poor creatures huddled in their cheerless dormitory, I
fancy an old ghost with a snuff-box that does not creak.  “There, Goody,
take of my rappee.  You will not sneeze, and I shall not say ‘God bless
you.’  But you will think kindly of old Queen Charlotte, won’t you?  Ah!
I had a many troubles, a many troubles.  I was a prisoner almost so much
as you are.  I had to eat boiled mutton every day: _entre nous_, I
abominated it.  But I never complained.  I swallowed it.  I made the best
of a hard life.  We have all our burdens to bear.  But hark!  I hear the
cock-crow, and snuff the morning air.”  And with this the royal ghost
vanishes up the chimney—if there be a chimney in that dismal harem, where
poor old Twoshoes and her companions pass their nights—their dreary
nights, their restless nights, their cold long nights, shared in what
glum companionship, illumined by what a feeble taper!

“Did I understand you, my good Twoshoes, to say that your mother was
seven-and-twenty years old when you were born, and that she married your
esteemed father when she herself was twenty-five? 1745, then, was the
date of your dear mother’s birth.  I daresay her father was absent in the
Low Countries, with his Royal Highness the Duke of the thing, under whom
he had the honour of carrying a halberd at the famous engagement of
Fontenoy—or if not there, he may have been at Preston Pans, under General
Sir John Cope, when the wild Highlanders broke through all the laws of
discipline and the English lines; and, being on the spot, did he see the
famous ghost which didn’t appear to Colonel Gardner of the stuff?  My
good creature, is it possible you don’t remember that Doctor Swift, Sir
Robert Walpole (my Lord Orford, as you justly say), old Sarah
Marlborough, and little Mr Pope, of Twitnam, died in the year of your
birth?  What a wretched memory you have!  What? haven’t they a library,
and the commonest books of reference at the old convent of Saint Lazarus,
where you dwell?”

“Convent of Saint Lazarus, Prince William, Dr Swift, Atossa, and Mr Pope,
of the thing!  What is the gentleman talking about?” says old goody, with a
“Ho! ho!” and a laugh like a old parrot—you know they live to be as old
as Methuselah, parrots do, and a parrot of a hundred is comparatively
young (ho! ho! ho!).  Yes, and likewise carps live to an immense old age.
Some which Frederick the Great fed at Sans Souci are there now, with
great humps of blue mould on their old backs; and they could tell all
sorts of queer stories, if they chose to speak—but they are very silent,
carps are—of their nature _peu communicatives_.  Oh! what has been thy
long life, old goody, but a dole of bread and water and a perch on a
cage; a dreary swim round and round a Lethe of a pond?  What are Rossbach
or Jena to those mouldy ones, and do they know it is a grandchild of
a thing who brings bread to feed them?

No!  Those Sans Souci carps may live to be a thousand years old and have
nothing to tell but that one day is like another; and the history of
friend Goody Twoshoes has not much more variety than theirs.  Hard
labour, hard fare, hard bed, numbing cold all night, and gnawing hunger
most days.  That is her lot.  Is it lawful in my prayers to say, “Thank
heaven, I am not as one of these”?  If I were eighty, would I like to
feel the hunger always gnawing, gnawing? to have to get up and make a bow
when Mr Bumble the beadle entered the common room? to have to listen to
Miss Prim, who came to give me her ideas of the next world?  If I were
eighty, I own I should not like to have to sleep with another gentleman
of my own age, gouty, a bad sleeper, kicking in his old dreams, and
snoring; to march down my vale of years at word of command, accommodating
my tottering old steps to those of the other prisoners in my dingy,
hopeless old gang; to hold out a trembling hand for a sickly pittance of
gruel, and say, “Thank you, ma’am,” to Miss Prim, when she has done
reading her sermon.  John! when Goody Twoshoes comes next Friday, I
desire she may not be disturbed by theological controversies.  You have a
fair voice, and I heard you and the maids singing a hymn very sweetly the
other night, and was thankful that our humble household should be in such
harmony.  Poor old Twoshoes is so old and toothless and quaky, that she
can’t sing a bit; but don’t be giving yourself airs over her, because she
can’t sing and you can.  Make her comfortable at our kitchen hearth.  Set
that old kettle to sing by our hob.  Warm her old stomach with nut-brown
ale and a toast laid in the fire.  Be kind to the poor old school-girl of
ninety, who has had leave to come out for a day of Christmas holiday.
Shall there be many more Christmases for thee?