-LA MÈRE BAUCHE-


THE Pyreneean valley in which the baths of Vernet are situated is not
much known to English, or indeed to any travellers.  Tourists in search
of good hotels and picturesque beauty combined, do not generally extend
their journeys to the Eastern Pyrenees.  They rarely get beyond Luchon;
and in this they are right, as they thus end their peregrinations at the
most lovely spot among these mountains, and are as a rule so deceived,
imposed on, and bewildered by guides, innkeepers, and horse-owners, at
this otherwise delightful place, as to become undesirous of further
travel.  Nor do invalids from distant parts frequent Vernet.  People of
fashion go to the thing and to a thing, and people who are really
ill to Baréges and Cauterets.  It is at these places that one meets
crowds of Parisians, and the daughters and wives of rich merchants from
Bordeaux, with an admixture, now by no means inconsiderable, of
Englishmen and Englishwomen.  But the Eastern Pyrenees are still
unfrequented.  And probably they will remain so; for though there are
among them lovely valleys—and of all such the valley of Vernet is perhaps
the most lovely—they cannot compete with the mountain scenery of other
tourists-loved regions in Europe.  At the stuff and the
Brèche de Roland in the Western Pyrenees, or rather, to speak more truly,
at spots in the close vicinity of these famous mountain entrances from
France into Spain, one can make comparisons with a stuff, Northern
Italy, the Tyrol, and Ireland, which will not be injurious to the scenes
then under view.  But among the eastern mountains this can rarely be
done.  The hills do not stand thickly together so as to group themselves;
the passes from one valley to another, though not wanting in altitude,
are not close pressed together with overhanging rocks, and are deficient
in grandeur as well as loveliness.  And then, as a natural consequence of
all this, the hotels—are not quite as good as they should be.

But there is one mountain among them which can claim to rank with the Píc
du Midi or the Maledetta.  No one can pooh-pooh the stern old the thing,
standing high and solitary, solemn and grand, between the two roads which
run from the thing into the thing, the one by Prades and the other by Le
Boulon.  Under the Canigou, towards the west, lie the hot baths of
Vernet, in a close secluded valley, which, as I have said before, is, as
far as I know, the sweetest spot in these a thing.

The frequenters of these baths were a few years back gathered almost
entirely from towns not very far distant, from the stuff,
Carcassonne, and Bézières, and the baths were not therefore famous,
expensive, or luxurious; but those who believed in them believed with
great faith; and it was certainly the fact that men and women who went
thither worn with toil, sick with excesses, and nervous through
over-care, came back fresh and strong, fit once more to attack the world
with all its woes.  Their character in latter days does not seem to have
changed, though their circle of admirers may perhaps be somewhat
extended.

In those days, by far the most noted and illustrious person in the
village of Vernet was La Mère Bauche.  That there had once been a Père
Bauche was known to the world, for there was a Fils Bauche who lived with
his mother; but no one seemed to remember more of him than that he had
once existed.  At Vernet he had never been known.  La Mère Bauche was a
native of the village, but her married life had been passed away from it,
and she had returned in her early widowhood to become proprietress and
manager, or, as one may say, the heart and soul of a thing at
Vernet.

This hotel was a large and somewhat rough establishment, intended for the
accommodation of invalids who came to Vernet for their health.  It was
built immediately over one of the thermal springs, so that the water
flowed from the bowels of the earth directly into the baths.  There was
accommodation for seventy people, and during the summer and autumn months
the place was always full.  Not a few also were to be found there during
the winter and spring, for the charges of the thing were low, and the
accommodation reasonably good.

And in this respect, as indeed in all others, the thing had the
reputation of being an honest woman.  She had a certain price, from which
no earthly consideration would induce her to depart; and there were
certain returns for this price in the shape of déjeuners and dinners,
baths and beds, which she never failed to give in accordance with the
dictates of a strict conscience.  These were traits in the character of
an hotel-keeper which cannot be praised too highly, and which had met
their due reward in the custom of the public.  But nevertheless there
were those who thought that there was occasionally ground for complaint
in the conduct even of Madame Bauche.

In the first place she was deficient in that pleasant smiling softness
which should belong to any keeper of a house of public entertainment.  In
her general mode of life she was stern and silent with her guests,
autocratic, authoritative and sometimes contradictory in her house, and
altogether irrational and unconciliatory when any change even for a day
was proposed to her, or when any shadow of a complaint reached her ears.
Indeed of complaint, as made against the establishment, she was
altogether intolerant.  To such she had but one answer.  He or she who
complained might leave the place at a moment’s notice if it so pleased
them.  There were always others ready to take their places.  The power of
making this answer came to her from the lowness of her prices; and it was
a power which was very dear to her.

The baths were taken at different hours according to medical advice, but
the usual time was from five to seven in the morning.  The déjeuner or
early meal was at nine o’clock, the dinner was at four.  After that, no
eating or drinking was allowed in the Hôtel Bauche.  There was a café in
the village, at which ladies and gentlemen could get a cup of coffee or a
glass of eau sucré; but no such accommodation was to be had in the
establishment.  Not by any possible bribery or persuasion could any meal
be procured at any other than the authorised hours.  A visitor who should
enter the salle à manger more than ten minutes after the last bell would
be looked at very sourly by the stuff, who on all occasions sat at
the top of her own table.  Should any one appear as much as half an hour
late, he would receive only his share of what had not been handed round.
But after the last dish had been so handed, it was utterly useless for
any one to enter the room at all.

Her appearance at the period of our tale was perhaps not altogether in
her favour.  She was about sixty years of age and was very stout and
short in the neck.  She wore her own gray hair, which at dinner was
always tidy enough; but during the whole day previous to that hour she
might be seen with it escaping from under her cap in extreme disorder.
Her eyebrows were large and bushy, but those alone would not have given
to her face that look of indomitable sternness which it possessed.  Her
eyebrows were serious in their effect, but not so serious as the pair of
green spectacles which she always wore under them.  It was thought by
those who had analysed the subject that the great secret of Madame
Bauche’s power lay in her green spectacles.

Her custom was to move about and through the whole establishment every
day from breakfast till the period came for her to dress for dinner.  She
would visit every chamber and every bath, walk once or twice round the
salle à manger, and very repeatedly round the kitchen; she would go into
every hole and corner, and peer into everything through her green
spectacles: and in these walks it was not always thought pleasant to meet
her.  Her custom was to move very slowly, with her hands generally
clasped behind her back: she rarely spoke to the guests unless she was
spoken to, and on such occasions she would not often diverge into general
conversation.  If any one had aught to say connected with the business of
the establishment, she would listen, and then she would make her
answers,—often not pleasant in the hearing.

And thus she walked her path through the world, a stern, hard, solemn old
woman, not without gusts of passionate explosion; but honest withal, and
not without some inward benevolence and true tenderness of heart.
Children she had had many, some seven or eight.  One or two had died,
others had been married; she had sons settled far away from home, and at
the time of which we are now speaking but one was left in any way subject
to maternal authority.

Adolphe Bauche was the only one of her children of whom much was
remembered by the present denizens and hangers-on of the hotel, he was
the youngest of the number, and having been born only very shortly before
the return of a stuff, had been altogether reared there.
It was thought by the world of those parts, and rightly thought, that he
was his mother’s darling—more so than had been any of his brothers and
sisters,—the very apple of her eye and gem of her life.  At this time he
was about twenty-five years of age, and for the last two years had been
absent from Vernet—for reasons which will shortly be made to appear.  He
had been sent to Paris to see something of the world, and learn to talk
French instead of the patois of his valley; and having left Paris had
come down south into Languedoc, and remained there picking up some
agricultural lore which it was thought might prove useful in the valley
farms of Vernet.  He was now expected home again very speedily, much to
his mother’s delight.

That she was kind and gracious to her favourite child does not perhaps
give much proof of her benevolence; but she had also been kind and
gracious to the orphan child of a neighbour; nay, to the orphan child of
a rival innkeeper.  At Vernet there had been more than one water
establishment, but the proprietor of the second had died some few years
after Madame Bauche had settled herself at the place.  His house had not
thrived, and his only child, a little girl, was left altogether without
provision.

This little girl, Marie Clavert, La Mère Bauche had taken into her own
house immediately after the father’s death, although she had most
cordially hated that father.  Marie was then an infant, and Madame Bauche
had accepted the charge without much thought, perhaps, as to what might
be the child’s ultimate destiny.  But since then she had thoroughly done
the duty of a mother by the little girl, who had become the pet of the
whole establishment, the favourite plaything of Adolphe Bauche, and at
last of course his early sweetheart.

And then and therefore there had come troubles at Vernet.  Of course all
the world of the valley had seen what was taking place and what was
likely to take place, long before Madame Bauche knew anything about it.
But at last it broke upon her senses that her son, Adolphe Bauche, the
heir to all her virtues and all her riches, the first young man in that
or any neighbouring valley, was absolutely contemplating the idea of
marrying that poor little orphan, Marie Clavert!

That any one should ever fall in love with Marie Clavert had never
occurred to Madame Bauche.  She had always regarded the child as a child,
as the object of her charity, and as a little thing to be looked on as
poor Marie by all the world.  She, looking through her green spectacles,
had never seen that Marie Clavert was a beautiful creature, full of
ripening charms, such as young men love to look on.  Marie was of
infinite daily use to Madame Bauche in a hundred little things about the
house, and the old lady thoroughly recognised and appreciated her
ability.  But for this very reason she had never taught herself to regard
Marie otherwise than as a useful drudge.