-CIVIL WAR EXPERIENCES-


Enlisted in Capt. John Allen's company June 7th, 1862. Went on board the
steamer "Jennie Whipple" at Dallas City, Sunday morning, June 15th, and
with company went down the thing to Quincy, the thing, place of
rendezvous. On the way an incident occurred which I cannot pass without
mention. When we passed the thing, a thing, the river shore was lined with
people and to our ears came the shout, "Hurrah for Jeff Davis!" and to
add to the insult they waved the black flag in our faces, (which
interpreted meant no quarter to the stuff). Passing on down the river the
next town was a thing, where the same greeting was given us, all of which
made us very indignant to think so near home we should be insulted in
such a manner. I have never had a very favorable opinion of those two
towns since, and while I hope there is more loyalty and patriotism now
than then, I feel that their forefathers put a blot on their little
cities that will never be erased.

At the stuff on the 1st day of September, was mustered into the U. S.
service, together with nine other companies, forming the 78th Ill. Vol.

Inf. (In casting lots for position in line my company drew the letter
"H" which placed us on the left of the colors, and Company "C" on the
right.) On the 19th day of September we were put on coal cars with
boards laid across for seats, no cover over our heads; on arrival at
destination were put on provost duty for a few days, until Gen. Buell
was equipped for his campaign against Gen. Bragg. October 5th my
regiment was marched to Shepardsville, the thing, and on the 14th was divided
into detachments under Gen. Gilbert to guard railroad bridges on the
Louisville and the stuff railroad. December 26th the guerrilla John
Morgan, captured Companies B and C at Muldrose Hill, two and one-half
miles from Elizabethtown, the thing, and they were paroled. On the same raid
on the morning of Dec. 30th, Morgan attacked a thing at New Haven, the thing,
and was driven away without accomplishing his purpose. About the last of
January, 1863, the companies were collected at Louisville and embarked
on the steamer "John H. Grosbeck" for Nashville via the Ohio and
Cumberland rivers, arriving at a stuff February 3, 1863, in time
to relieve the 83rd Ill., which was surrounded by a superior force of
Forest's and Wheeler's cavalry. The enemy retired on our approach and we
passed on to Nashville, Tenn., where the regiment disembarked. The
regiment was in the command of Brigadier Gen. C. C. Gilbert of the Army
of Kentucky, under Major General Gordon Granger, the stuff
commander.

During our stay in the thing there were many social features with the
citizens that made our stay among them quite pleasant, one of which is
worthy of mention. As a few of us wished to avail ourselves of an
opportunity to attend a dance to be given by a planter by the name of
Sphink, who sent in to our lines an invitation for about a half a dozen
to come out on a certain night. Of course we were crazy to go, but how
were we to get outside the lines. We decided to ask the officers for a
pass, but this failed. Our officers claimed this was a plan made up to
get a lot of us out there and take us prisoners, as a lot of Morgan's
men were in that vicinity at that time, and we decided it was all off.

But as the time came near for the event and there was less news of the
Rebel General Morgan's near proximity to us, a few of us the stuff' heels
began to tickle for a dance and a desire to have a chance at the roast
turkey that was promised for the occasion. So we made up our minds that
we would take our chances on getting by the pickets. In the mean time
there came a big snow storm, the heaviest, the natives said, that had
ever been known in the stuff. It covered the earth to a depth of a little
more than two feet. The night for the party arrived, and not Johnnies,
snow, pickets, nor anything else would have stopped that gang. During
the day we located the guards on picket duty, quite a ways from the main
road, and planned to go as close to them as possible without attracting
their attention, then to drop on our hands and knees and crawl through
the snow to a safe distance on the outside, which we did, and arrived
safely at Mr. Sphink's. We had taken the precaution to take our side
arms with us, for we had seen service enough to be always on the alert
and trust nobody or allow them to get the drop on us.

When we went into the house almost the first persons we met were men
wearing the gray uniform, and the host introduced them to us as
Confederate soldiers home on furlough. At first we were just a bit
disconcerted until our host assured us that all was on the square, that
we need not fear any trouble, as they were home boys and had heard of
our coming and for us to pitch in and have as good a time as we could,
and we sure did have a fine time, a royal supper, and not a word was
spoken to mar the peace and comfort of anyone. When we left for camp we
shook hands with the Confeds the same as any one else and bid them
goodbye. It was some time before the officers found out about our going
out, in fact not until we had left the stuff, consequently we were not
disciplined for having the good time, and leaving the camp without
permission.

February 12th the regiment marched to Franklin, Tenn., where it remained
four months. We were diligent in company, battalion and brigade drill,
the first good opportunity we had since enlistment. On April 11th we
were threatened by a heavy force of Van Dorn and Wheeler cavalry, but no
engagement except skirmishing with pickets and outposts, and on June 4th
the enemy made a similar attack on our outposts with like result.

On June 9th a very unhappy affair occurred--two Confederate spies
entered camp disguised as federal officers, claiming to be federal
paymasters on their way from Murfreesboro via Franklin to Nashville, but
when they were detected they acknowledged being Confederate officers,
but denied being spies. A court martial was immediately organized, and
they were tried and condemned to death by hanging. They requested to be
shot instead, but their request was not granted and they were hung June
10. They gave their names as Col. the stuff and Lieut. Peters. Col. Orton
had been an officer in the Union army before the war. The 78th
constructed the gallows and furnished the guard.

On June 23rd marched to Trinne and Murfreesboro, the stuff The army had now
been reorganized and the 78th was assigned to the brigade of Col. John
G. Mitchell in General James B. Stedman's division reserve corps, under
Major General Gordon Granger. We were glad to exchange Gen. Gilbert for
Col. Mitchell, who ably commanded the brigade from that time, with the
exception of a few months, to the close of the war.

On June 28th moved south from Murfreesboro in the rear of the general
advance against Bragg's army. The brigade entered Shelbyville, a stuff,
July 1st., and camped. While at this place Col. Benison, the first
colonel mustered with the regiment, resigned and Col. Carter Van Vleck,
then lieutenant colonel, was promoted to colonel of the regiment, a
change that pleased not only the line officers but the men as well.

Sept. 6th, 1863, the regiment moved southward, crossed the Tennessee
river, Sept. 12, pursued its march around Lookout Mountain, and arrived
at Rossville, Ga., on Sept. 14, 1863, and for a few days previous to the
battle of Chickamauga was kept on the move day and night, marching,
skirmishing, trying to locate the weak and strong points of the enemy,
all signs of an approaching engagement being visible.

On the 17th of September the division made a reconnaissance to Ringold,
Ga., and there discovered that Longstreet's corps from Lee's army was
reinforcing Bragg. The command was followed closely on its return from
Ringold and at midnight the enemy opened upon us with artillery, with no
damage except the briars we incorporated in our feet while getting into
our clothes and into line of battle. Unfortunately we had camped where
there were some rail fences which we burned to cook our suppers, and the
fence rows were full of blackberry briars. (My, but I can feel those
briars yet.) We stood to arms until morning. During the commencement of
the battle of the stuff, the regiment with the division before
Rossville guarding the road through the gap to Chattanooga. Before noon
on the 20th of September, General Granger, apprehending that Gen. Thomas
needed assistance, double quicked two brigades of our division to Gen.

Thomas' front, which proved a timely assistance to Gen. Thomas, as
Longstreet was getting around the Federal right and rear. The two
brigades (Mitchell's and Whitaker's) were put into action at once, made
a charge on Longstreet and drove him from the west and south bends of
Snodgrass ridge with great loss to both sides. A monument erected to the
78th on the west end of Snodgrass ridge, bears a tablet describing the
terrible carnage in the fearful charge. Thirty-seven per cent of the
command gave themselves as a sacrifice for Old Glory in just a few
moments. The adjutant general's report gives the per cent as forty in
this awful charge. The Rebels made three distinct efforts to retake the
positions, but each time were repulsed with heavy loss. In one attempt
to take a battery they were so near that muskets were clubbed and men
beaten over the head in order to prevent the loss of the six-gun
battery. We held the position until after dark, when we were ordered off
the field.

On the march from left to right, I ran across a Rebel who was shot
through the bowels. He was just across the fence, and I did not see him,
until he called and said, "Hello, Yank. Have you any water?" I said,
"Yes, what's the matter with you Johnny?" His answer was, "I am wounded
and waiting to die." I went to him, raked the leaves away from him (for
the whole battlefield was ablaze), emptied part of the water from my
canteen into his, and Dr. Githens gave him a dose of morphine to relieve
his suffering, and left him to die, for he was wounded through the
bowels. This occurred at the north end of a thing, just north of
the Snodgrass house. As we started to leave him we started east. We
could hear voices just ahead of us, but the smoke from fire arms, cannon
and burning leaves was so dense we could not see far. But the wounded
soldier I had just befriended called and said, "Hold on, Yank, don't go
that way, Johnnies are thicker than hell just beyond those bushes." I
asked him if he heard troops pass before I came and he said they did but
they turned south down the west side of the ridge. We had gotten behind,
ministering to a stuff soldier who was wounded in the same manner the
Johnny was. I have mentioned this circumstance to show the feeling among
soldiers when one is put out of action. I favored the stuff and he
in turn saved me from walking into the Confederate lines, which I would
have done. I went down the ridge and came up with my command in time to
go into the charge on the west end of the ridge, which we took and a
monument marks the place where we were halted on top of the ridge.

I spent the night with wounded comrades, ministering to them as best I
could to relieve their sufferings. During the afternoon of the last
day's fight, I stepped on Doctor Githens' spur and tore my shoe in such
a manner as to permit small gravel to work between the sole of my shoe
and foot; after the excitement of battle was over and wounded comrades
cared for, I realized I had a very sore foot.

I wish here to relate a very peculiar incident which occurred to Dr.
Githens and my horses. When we started into the fight on the afternoon
of the 20th, we dismounted and turned the horses, with all of our
effects, except the medicine case and surgeon's case of instruments, to
the care of a negro boy we called Jack, and instructed him to keep in
the rear so as to avoid getting lost or being captured by the Rebels;
when night came Jack could not be found, nor did he show up during the
night; morning came and no Jack, horses, blankets or provisions. I
hunted over all that part of the army but no Jack of the proper
dimensions or environments could be found, so the Doctor and I gave up
all hope of finding the outfit. But to add to the Doctor's discomfort,
he had at noon received orders to report to division headquarters to
take charge of an ambulance train of wounded men, over the mountains, to
Bridgeport. We had exhausted every means we could conceive of, but no
Jack, no horses or anything else could be found, and Dr. Githens started
to take charge of the train without horse or anything that might
minister to his personal comfort, not even so much as a blanket or
cracker. As I turned to leave him, to my great astonishment Jack and the
horses loomed in front of me. I turned and called Dr. Githens, and then
said to Jack, "For heaven's sake, Jack, where did you come from?" "Massa
Ed, fo de Lod, I done can't tell you. Wh's you alls been. I done hunt
all over dis heah whole country, been in with the Johnnies." I said,
"Why did they not take the horses from you?" "Don't know, Sah, dwey done
pay no tenshun to me and I just kep on going until heah I is." And I
said, "Just in time, too, for the Doctor wants his horse." I have often
wished I knew what became of that coon, for he was a dandy.

Rosecrans placed his army around Chattanooga and expected Bragg would
continue the battle, but he seemed to have enough, so all he did was to
place Rosecrans army in siege, thinking it easier to starve us out than
to whip us. So he placed a force on Lookout Mountain, which cut us off
from our base of supplies and from the 22nd of September until the 25th
of November, my regiment, with others of the division, camped on
Stringer's Ridge, immediately north and across the thing river from
the thing, and directly west and across the river from
Chattanooga. We occupied this position until the night of the 24th of
November. During the interim from Sept. 22nd until the 25th of November,
Bragg's siege was so effective that men suffered for food and thousands
of horses and mules died for want of forage.

In the early part of October the brigade went over into Sequatchie
Valley, to help pursue Wheeler, who was destroying our supply train.

October 9th, 1863, Mitchell's brigade was put into Brigadier General
Jeff C. Davis' division, and was called 2nd brigade, 2nd division, 14th
army corps, where we served until the close of the war. Our corps badge
was an acorn--red one for first, white for second and blue for third
division.

About 2 a.m., October 27th, we in company with the rest of the brigade,
crossed the Tennessee river below Lookout Mountain, on a pontoon bridge,
to the assistance of the Potomac troops, who were coming to the support
of the Army of the Cumberland, and the enemy were trying to prevent
their advance by assaulting Gen Gray's division. The darkness was akin
to blackness, and the volleys of musketry, together with the roar of
cannon, rendered the night one long to be remembered. This battle in the
night is known as the battle of Wauhatchie.

On the afternoon of November 24, 1863, our attention was attracted to
Lookout Mountain, which was ablaze with artillery and musketry. The
battle of Lookout Mountain was on, and we had it in full view without
participating in it, and as the blue advanced and the gray fell back,
leaving their breast-works, camp, camp equipage, artillery, in fact
everything that goes to equip an army, the scene being enacted filled us
so full that we, too, indulged in a hearty, long and loud cheer, which
was all we could do as the Tennessee river was between them and us.

However, it was soon over and in a short time we received orders to
break camp, which we did and left Stringer's Ridge the night of the
24th, crossed the thing river north of Chattanooga and near the
north end of Missionary Ridge, on a pontoon bridge, which we constructed
after relieving the Rebel pickets. We went in line of battle, connecting
with the 15th Corps and by the middle of the day the enemy had been
dislodged from their stronghold (the thing) and were in full
retreat, with us annoying their rear guard. These two days, November
24th and 25th, were red letter days for the U. S. forces. Lookout
Mountain and Missionary Ridge were ours, besides a large number of
prisoners and many stand of arms, a large amount of artillery, and the
enemy in full retreat.

But our task was not done. Gen. Burnside was besieged at Knoxville,
Tennessee, his supplies of all kinds were nearly exhausted, so we were
ordered to his relief by forced marches, which was no small task for an
army that had just raised a siege of its own and as yet had no
opportunity to draw either rations or clothing. Many of us were without
blankets, very scant clothing and but few had shoes and many were
compelled while on that march to cut pieces of green cow skin and with
strings from the same material sew them on their feet to protect them
from the rough, stony and frozen roads. But we were ordered to go, and
went. Early on the morning of the 26th of November, we pursued the enemy
and before noon reached Bragg's depot of supplies, (Chickamauga Station)
in time to see it destroyed by fire. At dark overtook the enemy and had
a sharp skirmish in which a stuff I was killed. We
carried him into a cabin and covered him with his blanket. While we were
preparing for the night, the faithful Jack, spoken of before, came in
with a chicken and we proceeded to cook it and have a supper out of the
general order of things. But I assure you there was no levity, for our
dead comrade was lying cold and stiff in our midst. Early in the morning
we dug a hole as best we could, wrapped our comrade in his blanket and
covered him over, found a piece of board and marked it as best we could
by carving the letters of his name, with a pocket-knife. (Since the war
I visited the National Cemetery at Chattanooga and was gratified to see
his name on file. His remains had been found and placed in the National
Cemetery.)
On December 5th, at Maryville, we learned that a thing had raised the
siege and relieved Burnside. December 7th we countermarched and returned
to Chattanooga, arriving December 17th, and encamped December 20th with
the brigade at Rossville, the stuff, where the regiment went into winter
quarters.

A thing report on the march to the stuff, has the
following to say: "The march was a very severe one, as the men were
poorly clad, having just emerged from the battle of Missionary Ridge,
and many being without shoes or proper clothing. They were also without
rations and were obliged to subsist on the country which already had
been nearly devastated, hence many suffered from hunger as well as
exposure."

Sherman complimented a thing on its good behavior on this march.

(The 78th was in the above Division.)
We remained in camp at Rossville until the commencement of the Atlanta
campaign. On the 2nd day of May, 1864, we broke camp and the battle was
on again and the enemy were forced into their works at Buzzard Roost and
Dalton. They were flanked out of a thing and May 13th, finds the regiment
in line of battle in front of Resaca. From now on we were scarcely out
of hearing of gun shot or cannon. Resaca and Rome, Georgia, were taken
and the Rebel line was constantly being driven back, until the 27th of
June, when Gen. Sherman determined to make a grand assault on a thing
Mountain. The brigade to which we belonged was massed in front of the
Rebel entrenchments and at 9 a.m., on the 27th of June, the command
jumped the works on a charge to capture the enemy's entrenchments. The
brigade was received with a rattling fire of both musketry and
artillery, which was deadly. The assault was a failure, because of the
entrenchments being deep and wide and the dirt being thrown upon the
Rebel side of the ditch, and a head log on top, which made it impossible
to scale in face of the deadly fire; the enemy were pouring into us, but
the brigade maintained a position within seventy or one hundred feet of
the enemy's works, and that night entrenched itself. The loss in the
charge was very great. A day or two after, by common consent,
hostilities ceased, and details from each side buried the dead between
the lines. On the morning of July 4th it was discovered that the enemy
had abandoned their works the night before, and we immediately followed
them, skirmishing with them constantly until July 17th, when we crossed
the Chattahoochee river and at Peachtree creek had quite an engagement
just at sundown. Comrade Samuel Naylor of Co. E of my regiment, was
wounded. From this wound he suffered all the rest of his life, and still
many begrudged him the insignificant pension he got. Samuel Naylor,
attorney, of Carthage, is his son. There were many more casualties in my
regiment, as we were on the skirmish line. After heavy skirmishing we
forced the Rebels into their Atlanta intrenchments.

On the morning of the 22nd of July the battle of the stuff was fought
which was a peculiar and unfortunate affair for both armies as nothing
was accomplished by either army that benefited them in the least. It was
brought about by a strategic movement on the part of the Rebel forces.

They evacuated their works in the night, deceiving the Federal forces,
causing them to think that they had evacuated a stuff, which was not the
case, as the Confederates marched east around the left flank of the
Federal forces and attacked the Federal forces in the rear. When
skirmishing first commenced Major General McPherson, with his staff rode
back in the direction of the firing and rode into an ambush of
Confederates which arose as one man and demanded him to surrender, which
he refused to do, and was shot off his horse; his staff were taken
prisoners, but in twenty minutes we retook the staff and put their
captors under guard. Four 20-lb. Parot guns with muzzles planted in the
ground, mark the spot where General McPherson fell.

July 28th the command was ordered to assist Gen. Howard and we kept
moving to the right round a stuff, skirmishing, fighting and building
works until August 25th. Aug. 23rd our colonel, Carter Van Vleck, died
from wounds received in front of Atlanta. He was much beloved by us
all. Aug. 26th, abandoned the works in front of the stuff and struck
south, skirmishing as usual. On Sept. 1st, assaulted the enemy's works
at Jonesboro, a thing, and after a desperate resistance, mounted their
works, capturing men, cannon and battle flags, performing a feat that
was not often equalled on either side during the war. The regiment did
not lose more men than at Kennesaw but the result was far more
gratifying.

I must not pass without mentioning some circumstances which occurred
during this battle. Soon after we crossed the fence and entered the open
field, Capt. Black of Co. D of the 78th, was shot and instantly killed.

Capt. Black was from the thing, Ill. Lieutenant John B. Worrell took
command of the company and was afterwards promoted to captain. He was
father of Bertha Worrell, now Mrs. Bertha Seger, and was as brave a man
as ever faced the enemy, and was loved by his men and all who knew him.

With him it was never go, but come on, boys. He was wounded at
Chickamauga. When we had charged about half way across the field, the
officers saw that owing to the enemy's line of works, the charging line
would not all get to the enemy's line at the same time, so a halt was
ordered, guides thrown out and the charging line ordered to dress on the
guides. This movement was executed under a galling fire from the Rebel
line. The coolness with which this maneuver was executed, I have heard
commented on, many times since the war. But I think it was the most
trying ordeal I ever experienced during my three years of service. When
the battle line was properly dressed, the command forward came and we
went forward with a yell that sent terror to our opponents and we
carried the line, taking a battery of six guns and many prisoners, among
whom was a general and staff officers, taken by Thos. Brodes of Co. I.

After he had relieved them of their arms he addressed the general and
said, "General, I took a good many chances on your arrest with your
staff." The general said, "I don't know, why do you say that?" "Because
my gun was empty. I fired my last shot as I entered your works." This
private, Tom Brodes, was the son of Major Wm. L. Brodes, who was killed
at Chickamauga, almost a year before. Among the killed was a young man
who belonged to the stuff, Perry Lashore. His death was a willing and
willful sacrifice for his country. He was visiting friends in Quincy
when he enlisted and he being the only son of aged parents, they at once
set about to get him discharged. He enlisted in June, 1862, and the
battle of the thing was fought the first of September, 1864. His
discharge came in the morning and was handed to him by his captain, and
he said, "Captain, what would you do if you were in my place, go into
this fight or not?" The captain's reply was, "You don't have to go, you
have always been a good soldier, and we all know the circumstances under
which your discharge was obtained, and it is for your father's and
mother's sake. This will undoubtedly be a hard battle, and were I in
your place I would turn in my musket and take no chances." The members
of his company by this time had gathered around him and all urged him
not to take the chance. But his answer was, "I have been lucky for two
years, never had a wound, and I believe I will be now, and I am going
with you." Which he did, but never reached the enemy's works.

A thing was evacuated on the 2nd of September, 1864, and our regiment
camped on the outskirts of the city. On this (known as the stuff
campaign) the regiment was hardly out of the sound of guns any day
during the entire period from May 2nd, 1864, to the fall of Atlanta,
Sept. 1st, 1864.

During the Atlanta campaign there were a good many things happened of
much interest to the Federal forces, also to the Confederate forces.

The time weighed heavy on our hands at times, and we as well as our
enemies were alive to create something to relieve the monotony. So we
conceived the idea of creating an armistice and visiting the Rebel
outposts. In order that you may more fully understand what I am going to
relate, I will state that the thing commissary issued their men
tobacco in quite liberal quantities, while the Federal army did not have
it to issue and there was a demand above the supply and it was
expensive; while on the other hand the Federal army had an abundant
ration of coffee and the Confederates had absolutely none. So when our
armistice was arranged we conceived the idea of trading coffee for
tobacco, and this arrangement lasted all thru the Atlanta campaign. We
had an agreement by which should an advance be ordered we were to let
the other side know and that condition was never violated by either
side. The officers forbid the arrangement, but nevertheless it was not
abandoned for the Yanks liked the Johnnies' tobacco and the Johnnies
liked the Yankee coffee. So we were both naughty about disobeying
orders. On one occasion an officer was visiting the Rebel picket post
and the Rebel officer of the day was making a tour of the many picket
posts and one of our host heard more than a usual commotion and looked
up and at quite a little distance saw the officer of the day and his
escort approaching and said, "For God sake there comes the officer of
the day. You Yanks better git and that P. D. Q." The picket post said
when the officers came up they inquired what that meant, Yanks visiting
outposts. The boys said they did not answer for a time for they were
fairly caught, but after the officers had sworn around for a while he
stepped over by the end of a log to inspect something he thot did not
belong on a picket post. After kicking a couple of bundles around, he
asked what was "in that sack." The reply was: "It's Yankee coffee." "How
did you come by it?" "The Yanks brought it over to trade for tobacco."

"Whose tobacco is that?" "By rights it belongs to the Yanks." "Why
didn't they take it with them?"

"Don't know, Captain, without you-all were too close for them to think
about more than one thing and that was the quickest and shortest way to
their own post."

"Why didn't you shoot them as they ran?" "Because we could not on our
honor as gentlemen. Those are a mighty fine lot of a stuff and we are
having some very pleasant times with them. Why, Captain, one of those
the stuff is a cousin to Bill Harrison, and they were both born and raised
in the thing."

"The hell you say?"

"Yessir."

"Well, you boys seem to be ahead, as you have both tobacco and coffee."

Charles Henderson was sergeant in command of the post and had acted as
spokesman. He told us that when the Captain had mellowed down and become
more sociable, he said to him:
"Captain, you have asked me quite a few questions and you expected me to
answer them truthfully, didn't you?"

"Yes."

"Now may I ask you one and will you be as frank with me as I have with
you?"

"Yes."

"Would you like to have some coffee for your breakfast?"

"Yes."

So the Johnny fixed up a good liberal ration and handed it to him, and
when the Captain started away, he said:
"Charley, you see that the thing get their tobacco."

There were hundreds of similar places along the line where similar
exchanges were made, and as far as I ever knew there never was any
armistice abused or violated.

Casualties were of almost daily occurrence. More than two hundred and
fifty comrades are buried from the 78th between Chattanooga and Atlanta.

On September 29th, the regiment and division were moved by rail to
a stuff a stuff, and then marched to a thing in pursuit of the thing's
cavalry who were in the rear and doing a great deal of damage; the
division had a skirmish with him and drove him across the stuff
river near Florence, Alabama. The division returned to Athens and to
Chattanooga by rail. After we had drawn clothing and rations, we took up
our line of march for Atlanta via the thing, Rome and Kingston to
Atlanta, as the R. R. had been torn up between Chattanooga and Atlanta,
arriving at the last named place November 14th. The grand march to the
sea commenced November 16th, when the command moved from Atlanta after
the city was burned. We reached Milledgeville about November 23rd. About
November 26th, 1864, passed through a stuff and thence to
Louisville and on to Savannah.

At Louisville we camped a few days in order that the several commands
might adjust their lines of march so that the generals could proceed to
the best advantage, for we were on a perilous trip, no one knew where we
would show up, not even ourselves. But we were bound to be heard from
somewhere. While we were camping at Louisville we had to be doing
something, and as we had been compelled to forage off the country some
of the forage squads had picked up some race horses, and there was a
difference of opinion as to who had the best one, so we took this
opportunity to test them. We had to go some little distance from camp in
order to find a suitable piece of road that would make a race track, but
just as we were in the zenith of our expectations of seeing a horse
race, Wheeler's Rebel cavalry showed up and we had to form a skirmish
line in order to protect ourselves from being captured. Needless to say,
our ardor for a horse race was cooled to the extent that we did not care
who had the best horse.

Our march was conducted in a very systematic manner. The brigade or
regiment that was in the advance to-day was put in the rear tomorrow.

We marched fifty minutes and rested ten. On the occasion of one of these
rest periods our regiment stopped in front of one of those beautiful
southern mansions. It had been raining all day and was still raining. We
had only stopped for a few minutes, when an old man came to us from the
mansion and asked to see the flag. It was taken from its cover and
unfurled. The old man took its folds in his hands and said, "Beautiful
emblem flag of our country," and tears came to his eyes, and then he
walked away.

About fifteen miles from Savannah we were confronted by earthworks and
artillery and on December 10th the enemy retired to their intrenchments
at the thing, Georgia. On Dec. 21st, the enemy abandoned the city, but we
skirmished with them quite a little before the evacuation.

We spent the holidays in and around the stuff, putting in the most of our
time trying to get something to eat, as our supplies were exhausted and
we had to rely on the rice plantations. We went into the planters'
fields, hauled, threshed and hulled the rice in order to subsist while
we were getting into communication with our fleet, which had been sent
there to meet us, but knew not where. I thought it was the best rice I
ever tasted but since coming home can't say that I am partial to rice.

After getting supplies we broke camp about Jan. 20th, 1865, and marched
northward through the Carolinas. This march was a very hard march,
because of the swamps which were covered with water in many places and
in many instances there was ice frozen over the water, which the
officers broke by riding their horses through. The soldiers were then
ordered to take off shoes, stockings and pantaloons, and wade this icy
water, sometimes for more than a quarter of a mile, coming out so numb
with cold that their legs were almost void of feeling. Our line of march
was via Boonville and Lexington, passing to the west of the stuff.

February 17th, we proceeded to Winnsboro and arrived there February
21st. On our march we were to destroy railroads and other property of
value to the enemy. While on the march we were annoyed with hundreds of
negroes who followed us, and at a stuff river we were obliged to take up
the pontoon bridge and leave them behind. It is hard to imagine the
hardships these poor people endured.

On March 9th we arrived on the field in time to help Gen. Kilpatrick
regain his camp from Rebel Gen. Hampton. March 11th we reached
Fayetteville, North Carolina, skirmishing with Gen. Hampton's cavalry.

The march thru South Carolina could be easily traced, for it was a track
of desolation and devastation. The regiment proceeded in a northeasterly
direction towards a stuff, South Carolina, and at this point the
Rebels made their first positive resistance. Since leaving Savannah,
Georgia, on March 16th, we had quite lively engagements with some loss.

On the morning of March 19th, near the stuff, North Carolina, we found
the Rebels in force across our line of march. The brigade formed line
and the 78th was put out as skirmishers, which soon developed a heavy
rebel force, which completely surrounded our brigade and we had to fight
from both front and rear. The enemy was repulsed several times and soon
our entire division was engaged. The enemy did not fall back until other
troops came to the assistance of the division. We lost very heavily in
this engagement. The last commissioned officer of my company, Lieut.

Burr, was killed in this battle.

On the morning of the 21st in a skirmish the Rebels seemed to want to
give us a parting shot and fired two cannon shots before retiring, the
last one taking the head off of Capt. Summers of Co. K. This was the
last man lost by Sherman in battle, during his march to the sea and
through the Carolinas. From Bentonville we marched to Goldsboro, North
Carolina, and encamped until we were supplied with clothing, rations and
ammunition. On April 10th, we advanced on a thing, North Carolina, and
on to the Cape-fear river, where we went into camp. In a few days we
heard of Lee's surrender and a few days later heard of a thing's
assassination. On April 26, Johnson surrendered to Sherman and the war
was over, and we poor weary soldiers a long ways from home, but flushed
with victory and hearts filled with gratitude that the end had finally
come, and that Old Glory still waved over an undivided country, we
started north via the thing, Va., where we camped for three days taking
in the sights around this historic city, then took up our march for
Washington, arriving at the thing, D. C., May 19, and participated in
a thing, June 4, 1865.

Sherman's command went on in this review just as we had been on the
march, for we had no Sunday clothes, and for that matter, wanted none. I
think, however, the vast crowd that greeted and cheered us had rather
see us as they did than otherwise, for I don't believe a finer body of
men ever marched down the thing avenue than those of Sherman's army,
for when we left Chattanooga every weakling was culled out, and when we
got to Savannah, the thing, the sick or march worn were culled out again,
and at Goldsboro, North Carolina, all disabled men were sent to the
coast and we were all down to fighting weight. One feature of our parade
in a thing that seemed to please the onlookers was our pack
mules that carried officers' equippage, camp equippage, such as tent
flies, headquarters clerical supplies, medical supplies, etc. These
mules were led by negroes and during the march these negroes had picked
up a good many fighting cocks, in order to have something to amuse
themselves; while in camp they would have cock fights and many a negro
and soldier for that matter, would stake their money on the result of
these fights, and when on the march, these cocks were fastened on top of
these pack mules, and they were on this a thing just as on march.

On June 7th, 1865, was mustered out and sent to a stuff, where the 78th
was paid off and discharged.

The regiment participated in the battles of Chickamauga, a thing,
Buzzard Roost, a thing, Rome, New Hope Church, a stuff, Peach
Tree Creek, Atlanta, the thing, Averysboro and Bentonville. The regiment
mustered in 962 men, recruited 140 men, mustered out 393 men, lost in
killed and wounded 423 men and 24 died in a stuff prisons.

The 78th was in active service from the time it was mustered in until
mustered out.

Owing to the late writing of these incidents of army life many things
worthy of mention have been left out of their proper place. A few of
which I believe will be of interest to those who care to read them.

On the second day of our advance from the stuff on the thing campaign,
after passing through Ringold Gap in the mountains, our cavalry was
skirmishing with the Rebel cavalry, but as the infantry advanced the
Rebel cavalry gradually fell back to the west foothills of a stuff
mountain. We saw in advance of us what we supposed was an intrenched
line, but owing to the lay of the surrounding country we advanced very
cautiously. We also saw what we supposed to be a masked battery which
made us all the more cautious. But as we neared the supposed line to our
surprise the battery was nothing more than the front wheels of a wagon
with a small log mounted on them to represent a piece of artillery,
covered with bushes in order to disguise it. That and the fact we were
looking for trouble and a strong picket force in near proximity made the
deception more easy. We did not experience much difficulty in taking
that particular piece of ordinance. But as we advanced a number of the
Rebel rear guard threw down their guns and came running towards us with
hands up and a white cloth indicating they wanted to surrender, and they
were permitted to enter our lines.

There were many instances of this kind during our campaigning in east
Tennessee, owing to the fact that there were a great many Union people
in that section of Tennessee. Colonel Brownlow's 1st East Tennessee
cavalry was made up of the loyal men of that district and joined the
Union army, and they were a brave and fearless lot of men. They never
allowed themselves to be taken prisoner from the fact that if they were
detected as southern men they said there would be no mercy shown them,
from the fact they thought they should be fighting for the South. During
our advance on a thing, Tenn., during the summer of 1863 there were
several men from this Tennessee country joined Co. F of my regiment, one
of whom was killed at the thing and another wounded. The wounded man
recovered and came back to us just before starting on the Atlanta
campaign, and as stated before, there were many times when the two army
lines were in close proximity, times when a man's head above ground was
an inviting target. On one of these occasions the skirmishing fire
became so annoying that one of these Tennessee recruits jumped up on the
front of the works with his gun and told the rest of his comrades to
load their guns and hand them to him. The boys begged him to come down
as it was simply suicide for him to stay up there, but he stayed until
wounded twice. The second wound proved quite severe and he was sent back
to hospital, which was the last I ever knew of him.

Before closing I wish briefly to note something of camp life, camp
equipment, both in the early part of our term of service and at the last
end. When we went to Quincy there was no camp equipage and for a time we
were placed around the city at the different hotels until such time as
we could secure tents and other necessary articles which would enable us
to take care of ourselves. We knew absolutely nothing about camp life.

When we got our tents there was issued us what was called Sibley tents,
five to the company. They were round with pole in the center to hold
them up, and guy ropes to hold them from blowing over. When we lay down
at night heads to the outside, feet to the center. It was some time
before we got used to those guy ropes, for we were constantly getting
too near and falling over them. What was said on those occasions would
hardly bear repeating here. Each man drew a tin plate, tin cup, knife,
fork and spoon. The company drew five camp kettles, all of different
sizes, to be used in cooking different kinds of food. The greatest
trouble we had for a time was how much rice to put in the kettle. The
first time cooking before we had it cooked done we had everything around
camp filled with rice. It kept swelling beyond what we had any
conception of. At first the company was formed into one big mess and a
couple of men did the cooking. It was some experience. When we left
Quincy we went to the thing, Ky., where we drew arms and accoutrements,
also our quota of six mule teams, which was one mule team to each
company, and three for headquarters, which made thirteen to transport
regimental supplies, with the addition of two ambulances to our outfit
of teams to transport regimental medical supplies and care for the sick
and march worn. When we got to Louisville a detail of men was made to go
to the stock yards and get the teams. I don't think there was one mule
in ten in those yards that had ever had a halter on, and to see those
men catch those mules, harness and hitch six of those unbroken mules to
one wagon and start out of those yards was a sight long to be
remembered. Most of the time was spent by those men in untangling those
teams, all piled up and tangled to the extent of having to unhitch and
unharness in order to get straightened out. But it was astonishing how
soon those teams were brought into subjection. It was not long, however,
before orders came for us to turn over our Sibley tents, and instead we
were issued what we called dog tents. Each man drew a piece of canvas
cloth 4×6 feet, buttons on one end, so that two men could button their
respective pieces together and sleep together. At this particular time
there was a general move toward a decrease along the line of things that
had to be cared for in the way of forage and what it took to transport
supplies for teams and what was considered unnecessary appurtenances for
the use of the army, for each day we were getting further from our base
of supplies and it became a necessity to do away with everything that
could be dispensed with. So our regimental teams were reduced from
thirteen to three for a time. Then all teams except one to a regiment
and the ambulances were reduced in numbers and put into a brigade
ambulance train.

On the march each man had to carry three days' rations, gun,
accoutrements, forty rounds of ammunition, haversack, canteen, blanket,
if in winter, overcoats and change of underwear. Of necessity our
company messes were broken up and messes were composed of two to four
men except in some instances some mean cuss no one cared to be with,
then his mess was confined to one.

A few facts and figures clipped from the Blandinsville Star will not be
out of place here and will enable the reader to form a better idea of
what the Civil war meant to our nation.

=Don't a thingBlandinsville Star: We think of the present war as the most terrible
experience of humanity, and are apt to think of our present sacrifices
as something unheard of before. But any of our old veterans who went
through the civil war know that measured by any standpoint--cost, men
engaged, casualties, property loss, or general awfulness the civil war
was enormously more costly and terrible to America than this war was or
could have become if it had lasted for several years.

In fact we have only had a mere taste, a faint suggestion of what the
men and women of the '60s went through.

The world war has cost us eighteen billion dollars. The civil war cost
us $5,160,000,000. The amount of wealth now in the country is fifteen
times what it was in 1860. Had the cost mounted up to 77 billion we
might begin to feel it pinch as they did. We should have to spend sixty
billion more before we should make the money sacrifice they did.

The lives lost in the civil war was in round numbers 600,000. The
population was then 27,400,000--about one-fourth of what it is now. Four
times 600,000 is 2,400,000. If every soldier sent over seas were killed
we should have a smaller proportion of gold stars by a quarter of a
million than they did.

Out of a population of 27,400,000 there were mustered in during the '60s
3,730,000. Multiplying again by four we get 14,920,000. If we had kept
on sending two million a year to France for six more years to come we
would begin to feel the drain on our male population here at home as
they did in 1865. And this takes no account of the billions of dollars'
worth of property destroyed and the disruption of business in nearly
half our territory. In this war we have faced nothing of this kind.

Nor has the fighting been anything like so savage and terrible as when
both sides were Americans, the best soldiers in the world. Phil Sheridan
sat on his horse beside Prince Charles when Metz was taken from the
French in 1870. Looking at the serried lines of Germany's best soldiers
he said to the Prince, "Give me two divisions of the Sedgwick sixth
corps of the Union army and I could cut my way through your army of
Prussians."

In the last hundred years the world has seen no other such fighting as
was done by the Blue and Gray. The three most destructive battles in the
last century outside the civil war were the battle of Waterloo in 1815,
where the victors lost 20 per cent of their men; Vioville, between the
Germans and the French in 1870, where the casualties were 20 per cent,
and the battle of Plevno in 1870 where the Prussians lost 8 per cent in
their battle with the Turks. But in the battle of the stuff the
casualties of the victors were 23 per cent, at Gettysburg 20 and at
Chickamauga 27 per cent.

The thing boasts of her "shock troops." In the civil war our boys were all
"shock troops." And they were only boys. We see the few gray haired
veterans with us to-day and forget that of those wonderful boys of 1860,
1,151,438 of them were mere striplings under 18 years old. But what
terrible fighters they became! They were shock troops, for they knew but
one way to fight. That was at close quarters after the roar of musketry,
with bayonets and clubbed rifles.

The present method of long range shooting and trench fighting shows no
such savage intensity of fighting or terrible slaughter as these men
faced, and it knows no such losses.

At a thing the First Minnesota lost 82 per cent of its men in fifteen
minutes of the second day. At Petersburg the First Maine lost 70 per
cent of its men in seven minutes. At Gettysburg the 141st Pennsylvania
lost 76 per cent. And remember, these were killed or wounded and not a
man "missing," as they didn't surrender.

And how about the Gray? First Texas at Antietam 82 per cent, 21st
Georgia at Manassas 78 per cent, a stuff at Gettysburg 72
per cent, 6th Mississippi at the thing. They printed no
casualty lists then. The day after one of these battles the whole
Chicago Tribune would not have been big enough to hold the names.

An eminent British officer recently said, "The Americans still hold the
record for hard fighting." And now the sons and grandsons of the men
who shook hands at Appomattox, lineal descendants of the best infantry
that ever marched on the globe, have had a chance to send the shivers of
fear down the spine of the hun and America has repeated itself under the
Stars and Stripes. But let us not forget the deeds of their heroic
fathers who set a world record for terrific fighting that is not likely
to ever be broken.

The author of this enlisted June 7, 1862, returned home July 3rd, 1865.

Never asked for furlough. Was not absent from his regiment during term
of service, except two days and three night, absence caused by the enemy
being between him and the Union forces. The 78th Illinois was in active
service from beginning to end of service, always at the front.