-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors to hold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from being made the objects of the sport, and
passengers of especial prominence have often been treated to a bath in
a tub of cold water or had their faces lathered with a broom as a
shaving brush while a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

There was a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a book to Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont to spend a part of their time; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentially French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward the development of Boucher's genius along
its right path, and sent his art towards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (double-florins) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of inspiration, all must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testament was included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writers.  When therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt in the world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testament, and he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was given by inspiration of God.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-progressionists.  The latest authority, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this distant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks that they left the room in which he was exhibiting, and,
assembling in prayer, entreated to be relieved of the devil who had come
amongst them.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a miscalculation, which the Boer pointed out, appealing to his
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh, this is a ready-reckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illustration of their simplicity is to be found in the fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on their
way to Egypt, and, having reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls into the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordance with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptural names to their settlements and villages;
and if they were severe on the natives, and ruled them with a rod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similar manner to the Hivites and the
Hittites, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim on them.  It was to escape British rule that
they, with their wives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and their sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth into the wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King of the Zulus.  It was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile without interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would have settled, as did the Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If they had been allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been saved a
good deal of trouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away the emigration
required to develop the resources of a country happily situated in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed to beg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possession of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Pagans who have fled there from the cruelties of their native kings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Natal,
the English shopkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where the Boers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Cape Colony, Captain Aylward writes: “The coloured people are
tame, submissive, and industrious, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
through the Transvaal,” continues the same writer, “I saw in various
directions gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living in a condition of ordinary
propriety, having abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had not noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that we have made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determination not to be
English the women, according to Captain Aylward, have been a wonderful
aid to the men.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rich lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were white for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly lived in affluence but were now in comparative want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompanying the insecure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers by the savage, still rejected with scorn the idea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the men began to drop or lose courage they
urged them on to fresh exertions, and kept alive the spirit of resistance
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame has nothing but praise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parishioners.  The honours which the Dutch lavish on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farmer gives his guest the best entertainment he can
provide, and “before the family retires to rest the large Bible is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the residence of a rich Dutch farmer, who
refused admission to his house and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leading the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a religions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Arthur writes:—“There are no finer young men in the world
than the young Dutch Boers, who are generally of immense height and size,
and very hardy.  Their life is