-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money out of our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmas cards are a tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what a blessing it will be when the
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptied: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but had
failed to make it more than a house of which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another every feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another image, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate went by he found himself in regular communion with
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts the Others.  He spared them the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quite how it had risen he probably never could have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wondered of old, in some embarrassment, whether he had a religion; being
very sure, and not a little content, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion some of the people he had known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question was straightened out for him: it became clear to him that
the religion instilled by his earliest consciousness had been simply the
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered his love of great
offices, of a solemn and splendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and no ceremonial more stately than those to which his worship
was attached.  He had no imagination about these things but that they
were accessible to any one who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholly on the
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, he heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman but one.  This lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s having, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had brought the little
change back; it was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front teeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

He felt quite determined, as he walked away, never in his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps a human being, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without precautions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her at all.  His
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murderer, and the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
for foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared her the injury of comparisons.  Such was the first flush of
George Stransom’s reaction; but as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it and
left only the pity.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenty years, and she was the only woman for whom he might perhaps have
been unfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; her
house had been the very easiest in all the world and her friendship the
very firmest.  Without accidents he had loved her, without accidents
every one had loved her: she had made the passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspected it, and in nothing had she been
more admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one else (keeping Creston was no trouble) from finding it out.
Here was a man to whom she had devoted her life and for whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green on her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivolity, the indecency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and he had
that evening a sturdy sense that he alone, in a world without delicacy,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he had no eyes for his page: his eyes, in the
swarming void of things, seemed to have caught Kate Creston’s, and it was
into their sad silences he looked.  It was to him her sentient spirit had
turned, knowing it to be of her he would think.  He thought for a long
time of how the closed eyes of dead women could still live—how they could
open again, in a quiet lamplit room, long after they had looked their
last.  They had looks that survived—had them as great poets had quoted
lines.

The newspaper lay by his chair—the thing that came in the afternoon and
the servants thought one wanted; without sense for what was in it he had
mechanically unfolded and then dropped it.  Before he went to bed he took
it up, and this time, at the top of a paragraph, he was caught by five
words that made him start.  He stood staring, before the fire, at the
“Death of Sir Acton Hague, K.C.B.,” the man who ten years earlier had
been the nearest of his friends and whose deposition from this eminence
had practically left it without an occupant.  He had seen him after their
rupture, but hadn’t now seen him for years.  Standing there before the
fire he turned cold as he read what had befallen him.  Promoted a short
time previous to the governorship of the Westward Islands, Acton Hague
had died, in the bleak honour of this exile, of an illness consequent on
the bite of a poisonous snake.  His career was compressed by the
newspaper into a dozen lines, the perusal of which excited on George
Stransom’s part no warmer feeling than one of relief at the absence of
any mention of their quarrel, an incident accidentally tainted at the
time, thanks to their joint immersion in large affairs, with a horrible
publicity.  Public indeed was the wrong Stransom had, to his own sense,
suffered, the insult he had blankly taken from the only man with whom he
had ever been intimate; the friend, almost adored, of his University
years, the subject, later, of his passionate loyalty: so public that he
had never spoken of it to a human creature, so public that he had
completely overlooked it.  It had made the difference for him that
friendship too was all over, but it had only made just that one.  The
shock of interests had been private, intensely so; but the action taken
by Hague had been in the face of men.  To-day it all seemed to have
occurred merely to the end that George Stransom should think of him as
“Hague” and measure exactly how much he himself could resemble a stone.
He went cold, suddenly and horribly cold, to bed.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.

The sand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in the whirl of
things?

This one was almost empty and the other altars were dim; a verger
shuffled about, an old woman coughed, but it seemed to Stransom there was
hospitality in the thick sweet air.  Was it only the savour of the
incense or was it something of larger intention?  He had at any rate
quitted the great grey suburb and come nearer to the warm centre.  He
presently ceased to feel intrusive, gaining at last even a sense of
community with the only worshipper in his neighbourhood, the sombre
presence of a woman, in mourning unrelieved, whose back was all he could
see of her and who had sunk deep into prayer at no great distance from
him.  He wished he could sink, like her, to the very bottom, be as
motionless, as rapt in prostration.  After a few moments he shifted his
seat; it was almost indelicate to be so aware of her.  But Stransom
subsequently quite lost himself, floating away on the sea of light.  If
occasions like this had been more frequent in his life he would have had
more present the great original type, set up in a myriad temples, of the
unapproachable shrine he had erected in his mind.  That shrine had begun
in vague likeness to church pomps, but the echo had ended by growing more
distinct than the sound.  The sound now rang out, the type blazed at him
with all its fires and with a mystery of radiance in which endless
meanings could glow.  The thing became as he sat there his appropriate
altar and each starry candle an appropriate vow.  He numbered them, named
them, grouped them—it was the