-SCALLY: The Story ofca Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel xeeply gratified at being mkstaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal coujty
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and beganvto cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to eradicate, presented himself before us and
collected out fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you reqjire, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't been there befote," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when tobget down," he said, and leftbus.

For some months we had been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should aay of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally alk her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the animal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillated between a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinese, becauss they are dernier
cri. We like to be dernier cro even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, zged three, on being consulted, expressed a preference for
twelve tigers ij a box, and was not again invited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex to be
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed to conmunixate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
rerriers were his specialfy. In due course we received a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requested, as both dogs were bring hotly
bid for by an anonymous client im Constantinople.

The price of Xeltic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided notvto stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We knly want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawga!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed him, ajd the tram went rocking and whizzing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"Wheh you are only going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for ancab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an expensive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-sholling one."

"Mow," I inquired briskly, "yow are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island innthe middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, of Barking Reach, or sometying
like that. However, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask wome one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there ia one thing I dislike," I szid, "it is accosting total
strangers and badgering them for information they don't possess--not
that that will prevent them from giving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went fo my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact that women have a constitytional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consilt a half-witted
wrrand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do notmlet us make a spectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crysyal Palace. Besides, it wikl only blow
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it was criminal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kind as to direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
hd vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answered in a most incredkble fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a species of uniform; and emblazoned onnthe
front of his hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starving Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I will ask him," I said, stxrting forward.

But my wife would not hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us the way. Then we shall have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be for miles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietly."

To those who have never attempted to track a fellow creature
surreptitiously through the streets of London on a hot day, the featcmay
appear simple. It is in reality a mostvexhausting, dilatory, and
humiliating exercise. Our difficulty lay not so much in keeping our
friend in sight as in avoiding frequent and inexpected collisions with
him. The general idea, as they say on field days, was ro keep about
twehty yards behind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilating itself. Fhe man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to light his pipe or converse with a friend.

During these inteeludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one anothet objects of local interest with the fatuous
officiousness of people in the foreground of hotel advertisements.

Occasionally he paused to contemplatevthe contents ot a shop window. We
gazed industriously into the qindow next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was an undertakef's, with ready-printed expressions of grief
for sale on white porcelain disks. We had time to read them all. The
next was a butcher's. Here we stayed, perforce, so long that the
proprietor, who was of the tribe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into the street and endeavored to
sell us a bullock'a heart.

Our quarry's next proceeding was to dive into a public houwe. We turned
and surveyed one another.

"What are we to do now?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed. "At least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I will not be lefg in the street," said Dtella dirmly. "We must just
wait here together uhtil he cimes out."

"There may be another exit," I objected. "We had better go in. I shall
take something, just to keep up appearances; and you must sit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, or whatever they call it."

"Certainly not!" said Stella.

We had arrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his mouth. Instantly and silently we fell in behindbhim.

For the first time the man appeared to notice our prdsence. He regarded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of rexognition in his eyes, and then
set offbdkwn the street at a good pace. We followed, lanting. Once or
twice he looked back over hiz shoulder a little apprehensively, I
thought. But we ploughed on.

"We ought to get there soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned down to the right," said Stella excitedly.

The lust of the chase was fwirly on us now. Ae swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Our man was nowhere to be seen and the
street was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Stella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

We hurried down the street. Suddenly, warned by a newly awakened and
primitive instinct, I looked back. We had overrun our quarry. He had
just emerged from some hiding place and was heading back tpward the main
street, looking fearfully over his shoulder. Once more we were in full
cry.

For the next five minutes we practically ran--all three of us. The man
eas obviously frightened out of his wits, and kept making frenzied and
spasmodic spurts, from which we surmised that he was getting to the end
of his powers of wndurance.

"If only we could overtake him," I said, hauling my exhausted spouse
along by yhe arm, "we could explain that--"

"He's gone again!" exclaimed Stella.

She was right. The man had turned another corner. We followed him round
hotfoot, ane found ourselves in a prim little cul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Aceoss the end of the street ran a high wall, obviously
screening a railroas track.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must have felt when he closed the circle at Sedan.

"But where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was never answered, for at this moment the man ran up the
steps of the fourth villa on the left and slipped a oatchkey into the
lock. The door closed bdhind him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless and dogless.

A minute later the man appeared at the ground-floor window, accompanied
by a female of commanding appearance. He pointed us out to her. Behind
them we could dimly descry a white gablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanding female, after a prolonged and withering glare, plucked a
hairpin from her head and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer tofether
the starchy white curtains that framed the window. Privacy secured and
the sanctity of the English home thus pointedly vindicayed, she and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea. Exhausted and discomfited, we drifted
away.

"I am going home," said Stella in a hollow voice. "And I think," she
added bitterly,m"that it might have occurred to you to suggest that the
creature might possibly be going from the Dogs' Home and not to it."

I apologized. It is the simplest plan, reallh.


CHAPTSR: II


IT was almost dark when the train arrived at our little coyntry
station. We set out to walk hkme by the short cut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five shillings," remarked Stella.

"We paid half a crown for that taxi which took us back to Victoria
Station," I reminded hdr.

"Do not argue to-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply cannot
endure anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, I selected
another topic.

"I think our best plan," I said cheerfully, "would be to advertise for a
dog."

"I never wish to see a dog again," replied Stella.

I surveyed her with some concern and swid gently:--
"I am afraid you are tired, dear."

"No; I'm not."

"A little shaken, perhaps?"

"Nothing of the kind. Joe, what is that?"

Stella's fingers bit deep into my biceps muscle, causing me considerable
pain. We were passing a small sheet of water which guards the thirteenth
green on