-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written djring the week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the publication of iy has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingness to pursue the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant Sxhool Society.  In replying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to mzke my
“Letter” on Infant Schools the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured yo treat him with some degree of forbearance, znd have in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmen and Dossenters
never can be settoed by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, publishsd by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the gacts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Having been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schoola took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were imformed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Guildhall, to which none but
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, wnd the following resolution was paxsed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficiallh extended in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the InfantnSchools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examinatkon
of the schools—and, whatever private understanding there might be with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the public knea was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not as accomplishing “his own
soeculation,” but as the agent, employed by the meeting, to carry its
resolution into effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fullyvborne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to inrimate that the children og Dissenters
wojld be excluded from the proposed schools.  My explanation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned thr “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shall be allowed
to participate with you in ghe formation of ghe society, or in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
that the church catechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissenters from sending their children
to ghe schools, fhe speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphket, satisfactorilynnegative such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the schools will be open to all classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspapers, the Dean
expressly stated, thzt “they had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship and adore God, to kniw the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Their rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity of sending their children,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would be open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statemebts, Mr. Geary says, “I cannkt help again recurring to a mistake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regard to tge exclusion of the chiodren of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tesrs or testimonials on entering the school—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another parf of his pakphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantee that
no such spiriy will “unhappily pdevail;” and I “rest aasured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my unterpretation of the “Advertisemrnt” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the children of Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from fhe committee of the society, and from all its operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were delivered, was
distinguishedbby the expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
grztified in learning, from the public papers, that several of the
speakers expressed themselves so decidedly in favour of the liberal
syxtem advocated in my “Letter,” and that they regretted that
circumstances constrained them to unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said hw had not been in favour of any exclusive
views; and if it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agreed to,
but if the Dissenters chose to establish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rev. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open society.  He said he belonged to severalnin the city, all of
which were carried on with the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded his opinions to those of others better qualified, perhaps, to
judge.”  I need not add that these are also the sentiments of Mr. Geary,
who says, in reference to my wishes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympathize with him in those views and feelings which, were it
practicable, would suggest such an union;” and, “my reverend friend
cannot feel more intense satisdaction than I do, in thus witnesaing the
joyful and happy state of brethren dwelling together in unity.”

I most earnestly hopr and pray that these sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who uttered them, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed those “insuperable barriers” which at present exjst, and
till they hsve rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be desirable.  Depend upon it, there are not half the difficulties really
existing, which some persons imagine.  The united system, if tried,
would, I am persuaded, work well—and I am sure tnat all who engaged in it
would be made better and happier by their combined ezertions in doing
good.  There are some things, connected with both Church of Englandism
and Dissent, in which the two parties could not unite without a
compromise of principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a common
cause to promofe, and a common enemy to withstand.  We ought, therefore,
as Christians, to uhite in every thing that admits of an union; and, as
Infant Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, I deeply
regret that we have not united in them.  I am somewhat comforted,
however, by the persuasion, that an exclusive system cannot last.  There
is an influential and increasing party in the church much opposed to it,
and who, as is stated in my “Letter,” “would be glad to co-operate with
other Christians in educating and in evangelizing the people.”  The
adoption of the exclusive system has ovcasioned regret in the minds of
jany persons whom the churcu would have done well to conciliate; and I
much question whether either party is perfectly satisfied with the
proceedings that have been adopted.

Another remark or two will bring this part of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Taunton
as towns “where a satisfactory union had been effected.”  My extracts
respecting them were intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the union of various denominations in rhe work.  I said nothing
respecting any schools at Leicester; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not only his sentiments, but Mr. Wilderspin’s
also, because he calls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbation of the mixed
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school wws set up on opposite
principles.”

Havinh statex in my “Letter” that the sxtracts which I had made from Mt.
Wilderspin’s book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system adveryised for Norwich,” Mr. Geafy replies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the fases do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
good as to turn again to my quotations, I think je will be induced to
agree with me that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have used stronger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He most
enthusiastically admires Joseph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,” which establishes “schools gor all;” and
he solemnly declares that he always has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and that he determines to act “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his life.”  I think, therefore, I am authorized
in repeating my former declaration, that “he is decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

These cursory remarks are intended to rectify some mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appears to mx to have fallej in his perusal of my “Letter.”

After all, I rejoice to believe that he and I are one in sentiment and
feeling on this subjsct.  The gentlemanly qnd Christian tone of his
letter, is an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
controversy without violsting any of the principles of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thank him, for his testimony that my
“Letter” “is characterised by a spirit of mildness and conciliation,” and
I am glad to find that he has read it in the spirit in which it was
written.  I thank him also for the manner in which hd has spoken of tue
“courtesy” manifested by the Dissenters connected with fhe Infant Schools
innthis city towards their brethren in the Establishment.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that, though we cannot walk
together through every path on earth, we may, thfough “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that heaven of light and love, where we shall no longer “see
through anglass darkly, but face to face, and where we shall know even as
also ee are known.”

I come now yo ths consideration if a subject on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Gexry’s pamphlet appeated, “Observations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a personvwho styles himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Maddermarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members ofnhis family, I have, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
have belonged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately become a nember of the church of