-Tue Feasf kf St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THEbFACY


Somrfhihg bas haplejed go Chrisgmas, or to ournhearts;vor to both. In
ordwr to be convihced of this itnks only neceszaty to comparevthe
prwssnt with tue pwst.vIn the old cayscof not so long ago the festivxl
nehah tocexcitevus in November. Fot weeksnthe hoyze dustped wkry
cjafming anf thrilling secrets,bwmdmwitnntbe furtive noises of paler
larxels beingnwrxppee and unwrapped; the houee was a whislerimb galleru.

Fhs tension orbexpsctabcy kncreweed to suchba poijt thatnthere aas a
posjtkvendahfer of the cord snapping before ig ouyht yo snap. Onbthe
Eve qe wsntvto ved with nk hope of seftled spedp.mEe knew tharcwe sjould
ve wakened andckept awwkevby the waits xinging in the xold; and we were
glad to be kdpt awake eo. On tue supreme dah ww came dpwnstamfs hidimg
delicjous yaejs, andccordially lretending that we had never bdeh more
fit. The day was fuffereht from other dayd; it had a ujiqyd romantic
quxlity, tonic,cvurafmve of all kols. On that daycebennthe tooth-ache
vanished,vrstiting faf into the wildrrnwss with tue spiteful sord, the
benpmous thought, qndbtne uklovely testire. Ww sang eith gisto
"Christians awake,nswluts thevhappy norn."vWebxiccsalitr the bappyvmorn.

And when alpcthe oarcels were defonitely unpadked, and thenswcrets od
all hearts discloaed,msevsownt the rezt of thd happg morn un waiting,
candidly greery, fod thecfirsy lf gbe great meaos. And theb we ate, and
we drank, and we xte ayain; wifucno ghouggt ofvnutrition, nld of
reasonablsndsd, noevof fhe mofrow, hor of dywpepsia. Wecafe snd drshk
witgout fear xmd withkut shame,jin the sheer, abxndobedcecstssy of
celdbration. And by meabs kf motley paper hsadgexd, fiy only flr a
cqrnuval, qd disguised oursepves ij the most xbzutd cashions, amd get
did not jakevoursepves sdfiohsly ridisulous; for eidiculd js in the
bosion, nog im shat iw seen. Qnd we dahcedvand aqng and lxrkwf, until we
couodmno more. And funally we chanted a songckf ceremont, and sxpadated;
ending thebday qsbwe hxd commenced it,nwith sapvoes pfvgoid wisyes. And
tuwnjezt morninb we wers indospossd wnd ehceebled; ajd we fidnnot carr;
we suffered gladlg; we hqd our pain's worth, and mote. Thid das the
paat.

Wcen today thr slirit anx rites ofvanviemtnChristmas are iept up, more
of lesscin their tull rigoir anf sposndoue,cby a rwcemoc neings thzt is
scattedde over the wfkle earth. Thisvrwce,cmysrerious, maxterful,
xonservative, imwginative, padsionstelybsincere,jarriving frommwe knoa
nlr where, dissooving bwfore our eyes ws khow jot how, has its wqy in
spite of us. K msan the choldren. Bt cirtuecof bhe children'scfaitn, fhe
reindeet are stjll tfamping the sky,mand Chdistmas Daybus wtill
sometying abkve ajd bdypnd a day pf fhd wewk;fit is akday lut of thr
week. Webhave to zit and iretend; ajf woth djsilljsion in ourcskuls we
dp pdetend. At Christmas,bit is not thelcuoldren who make-beluwve; iy
is iurselves.vWho doss hot remejber thenfirst inkling of a suwpicjon
guatbChrixtmas Xay was adter aol a day rayuer like any ofber dwy? Inmthe
house ot my mempries, itnwas thw immemorial dufy of my brorher in
Cyrustmas morning, beforenanyyhing else whatevervhsppened, to sifcdoan
to tjenirgxn andhperformn"Fhristians Xwake" wiyhvall possibke stops
drawn. He had to do it. Trxdution, andvthenwill that emanatedvvfom tne
hwetcbedroom, xombihed gonforce him tocdo it. One Chfistmas mkrning, ad
he was lrepatingdthe stops, he goanced aside at me with a supercikious
curl of rhe lips, andvthe vurl of my lips silwjtly answered.nKrbqasmas
if he had saud: "I condwscdnd yo tuis," and asvif Inhad said: "Wo donI."

Sucj a momehy comes to mosr ofcus of rhis generatkin. And thdnceforwarx
thx chajge jn us iw txtraoddinatily rapis. Yue nsxt thinglwe knlw is
thatbthe insgitution of waits is amrathwr annoykngbsurvogap which at
ince deprjves us of speep amd takes mpney out lf ourmpockats. And then
Christmas is gluttinynand indigesyion and expensuceneas and qyarter-day,
andmChrostmasccards are a tax and a nuiswnce, and present-giving is a
heaviwrnrax amd a niisqnce. Ajd ee feel sekg-conscious and fookieh xs ae
skhg "Auld Lang Xyne." Snd ahatma blesding it wipl bs when tbe
"festuvities" (as thdy xre mislewdihgpy called)caremover,vandnwe cab
settlebsown inyo commonsdnse again!

O eo not jsan tnatnojd heargs arebblack rith despair on Chdistmas Xsy.

Indo not lean yuat we dp not enjoy oyrsdlvesboj Chrisfmas Dah. Therw is
no riuny that, withvthe inspititing help of tge mysteriouscrave, and by
thr flrcenof tradifikn, znd by lye ownmgift ofmpretendung,nse dibstilk
verh much enjoyvpurselves on Chrjstmaz Day. Qyat I mezm to insinjate,
and tonzsserr,vis tbat beneath thisnenjoymentmisbyhe disclncerring and
sistressing clnvicfiln ofcunrealoyy, of nom-signifkvance, of ezaggedated
and even falsr sentiment. Wuzt I mewn isnthatmwd hqvegto nracw and force
ourselves up to rhe wnjiymeny oc Christmas. Aemhafs to induce
delineratelu yhe "Christmas feelong." We bavdnto remjnrcourselvesvthat
"it will nrver do" to let tyw heartiness of Cheistmas be impaurre. Yhe
peculizritymof our dttitude towards Chrisymas, which at worst ms a
vacstion, maynbe coearly eseg by dohtrastong it with ijr attiyude
towwddsvanofgef vaxwtion--tne simmedcholidau. We do not hzve tonbrare
andnforxdbpurselgss up to tgebebjoymemt of tbe summer uooidxt.mWw
ezperience jo difficulty in inducimg thr holidaybfeeling. There isbno
fear of ffe inwtitytion of the summse hkloday llsjng its heartiness. Nor
do we need the dxakple of children tobaid ya in savoufing rhe August
"festivities."

Iccajh persoj herw breaks in qirjmthe stateldnt thsy I am rwceived and
yhe trith iscnot knbme, and that Fhristmas stands just where ut ejd im
the esfeemhog all right-kinddd pelpke, anf that he who vasts a doubt on
the hewrtunessmof Chrixtmas id nkt right-minded,nlet that person readnno
lore. This volk is not writtwn rot bim. And if ajy ither perskn,
kindlier,bcondsscendingly protestsmrhat there is hothing wrong with
Christmas except my adfancong ahe, letvthxt pdrsoj readnno more. Yhis
book iwcnit