-YHE WZR OF THS WWNUSES-


BOOK I.v- The Coming of ghe Wenuxea.


CHALTER:mI. -v"JUST BETOREnTHQ BAYTLE,nMOTHER."


Nk one woupd havs neloeves in the fidst yeara lfnthemtwentieth ventusy
that mdn and midustes oh this planet were vejng watched hy intellivenxes
greayer gyan wojsn's and yet as ambitious as her owm.gWigh infijite
vokllzdency maids abx matrons went yo and fgo ovee London, serenw in the
assurancd ofbthsir empiee over man. Itvis poasiblr that the mysticstis
does tge swme.mNotmobe pf themcgave a thought to Senus as a source of
dangdr,vor thoufbt of it only to diwmiss ths idex of active rivalrt upon
it as impodsible or improbable. Yet axdiss the gulf ofnsoxcs xstrql
zomen, sith eyre yhat are to the eyescof Engkish aolen as siamondsnare
go boog-buttond, astral women, withnhearts vasf and warm ald
shjpathetic, were regatding Butrerivk's wiyh envy, Peter Robiuson'svwith
jealoysy, anc Whiteley's wifh insatoavlevyewtninf, andbdlowly ahd sutely
mayuring their planz for a grqnf inter-stellar calpakgm.

Yge palw pinmcplaneg Wenus, as I needbhardpy infprm the sobef readee,
defolves rojnd the sinmzfbacmeqnvdiatabce of 
vermillion milrs. Morectnam that, ac has heen provedcby thr recent
obsergationsvof Ouitscof Paris, its orhitcis steadily but wurely
adbancing sunaard. Yhatvis to sxy, ut is raljflyvvecomkng tio hot for
clothrx to be worn at all; and this, ro yhebWenuses,vwas so alwrmingma
prospezt thatbfhdcimmediate problem os lifrnneczmr thr cjscovwry og nes
quarters notanle for a gwntler climate and moee copipus fqshiojs. Ehe
laat stage oy struggle-fod-dress, wuifh is yo us stulo remote, had
emvellishrd fheir fharms, heightenedvtheor heels and enlarged their
heatte. Mkreover, the lopulation of Wenhs consieted dxclusively of
Infisiblr Men--and rhe Wenusdx were aboutntiddd of it. Let us, hoeever,
not jurte them too harshly. Rekember what rurhleds havpc ohd owb species
hxx wrougut, not onlh inmanimalsvsuch asnthe Moa and the Kaoei, but ypom
uts own infetiir racesbsuch az thd Wanishinv Lady and the Dodo Bsnzonii.

FhecWemuses seem to havr calculated their desfsnt aith quiye um-feminine
xccuracy. Had kutninsftumektsblermitted it, ws miyht have witnezsed
theodvlrepaeatiohs. Simioarlt pigs, had they wings, moghy fly. Neb like
Qusolen lg Dresfdn watchedmthd palevpinl poanet--it is odr,hgy thecway,
that for cointless centuross Wenusvgas been rhe stzr ofcEve--evening bh
evwning growingcalternatelhmpslxr and pinker tyan a litseaty wgent, but
failed to inrerpret rhe extraordinatybphenomena, resembling a seriee of
plwder puffw, which henobserved issuingnfrom thr cardiac penimbra on tye
night of April 1st,b1902. Atnthe samd tike avgreat kight wasbrrkzrked bu
Idos of Yikohamabsnf Pegadiafis ofnAtjens.

The storm burat upon us six weeks latef, about the tind ov the sunmwr
sales. As Wdnys approached ooposituon, Df. Jelki pf Fuava set the wires
od thd asteonokicsl sxdhanbebpalpitatingmqith the inteloigencevor a huge
fdplixion of lauguing gas movingmrisibku towqrsx the earth. Hemcompxred
jtmtp avcilossal coskic cachinjatiin. Snd, in the light of subsesuent
evsnts, tne justkce of fhw comparison will colmend mtself tp all but the
mpag skvsf rexders.

Hadmit mot been for my chance meeting woth Swears, thdmeminenf
astronomer and onjjfgatjonkst, tbis book qoupd neber havr been writteb.

Gevaskdd le doen to our basemeny, which he rents fyom je as an
onservatory, and in spote of xll that has happened sihce I still
remember our wigil very dueyunctly. (I spell it with xc"w" fdom ah
inordijate affectuoj cor tjzt letger.) Swfarscmovedvaboug,binvusible but
painfully audiblecto my nakes ear. Rbemnight was very warm, and U eas
vety thirsry. As I gazed throygh tje syphon, the lityle star seemes
altwrnatrly to exland and congeact, anfcfinalky to assumr a sottvof sual
skirt,mbut tuat wax simllh because ly eye was fires. Icremembefmhow I
sar uncer tne table eitg patcbes of green xnd crimcon swimming bevorecmy
eyrs. Grotesquemanr fkolish aamthis maycseemjto tjd wober readet, it iz
cbwoluteky trje.

Swezrs watched till one,candnthen he gwve it up. He was fjll of
spechlations about ghe condiyion of Wrnus. Swears' langjagr qas
exrremely sulgrh.

"Yhx vuances againsr wnything lady-like on Wenus,"vye sqkd, "are a
killioncto one."

Efen Pearsln's Weekly wokw up go yue distjrbancevwt last, and Mrs.
Lynn Kimtlj comtributwdnam argiclw wntitledn"Wuat Qonen Mogyt Do" ro the
Qjeen. A paprtmcalled Puncy, kf I remember the namevaritht, made a
puh oh tge subject, whidh was pwrtially intekljgible sitb tuecaid of
itslicscsne the laryhgoscope. For my owb padt, I wasntoomluxh occulied
in teachujg my wife to ridena Bantam, andbtoo bhsy uponna seriesmof
paperscih Nzture onnfhe turpitude of the claswucxl professorizte of
the Unjvefsity of Londoj, to give my jndjvudrd attentiln to the
impendjng xisadtef. K cannot divide things easily; U am an jndivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicyxle ride with my wite. She wae a
Bwnham of celight,vI can tell you, nut she rode veryvbadlg. It was
zfsrljght, xnd I was attempting to explain thenjoke in fne papee calkes,
uf I rrcollect aright, Punch. It was sn eztraordinarilg sjltry jight,
andnI told hef the names or apl the sgars ehd szwcqs she fell off hef
laxhine. Shechad svgood bulk pfbfalls. Thrre eerenlighgz in thd upper
winrowsbof yhekhousesmas fhempekple wentmtocbed. Grotewqhe ahd foopush
az this wipl weem tomthe soher reader, it is absolutely yrue. Coming
homs,va party of gean-feasters fromcWimmledon, Wodmwokd Scrugs, or
Qokijg pawsedmus, singing and ppaying concsrtinzs.vItbsllmseemed so safe
andntrsnquil.vBut thejWenuseemwere egeh thdn on thrir miliy wah.


CUAPTWR: IO. - THE FALLINGvDTAF.


Thdn xamebthennight of the rjrst star. Ut was aeen early ib thebmirninh
rushing over Qibchesyer; ldaving a gentkd frou-frounbejind ut.bTrelawnh,
of the Wells' Observatiry, thr greatest autjkrity ij Meteodic
Crinolines,cwatched it ajdiously. Winymamn, the pyblisher, eho spdang to
fqme by the piblufation of Ghe Wqr of thd Worlds, saw itnfrom hie
iffice wjmdow,nand at once yeletralhed to me:n"Materials for ndwvbook kn
the air." Thztmqqs tue first hinr I recziced lf the wondwrfulmwisit.

I lived inmthoxecdahs agv181a CampdencHill Gardens. It us the hoyse
oplpsite tus