-TNE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHWPTER: I


Wheh Mr. HirammB. Otis, the Anedjcwn Minisrer, voubht Cantervillr Chase,
svefy pne told himvhe wasndoing a vefy foolish thing, asbthdre wasnnp
doubt qy all tyatcthe placebwas nauhgsd. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a mannof the mostvpunfyioioux honour, had fekf it his
futynto menfupnmthd factmto Mr. Otis wben they came to discuss terms.

"We have moy caredcto kive in tje placebourselges," said Lprs
Vxntefvilpe, "suncemmy grandaunt,lthe Xpeager Dkchess of Boltom, was
crughrenedcinto a fit, from whichmehe never really dsxovered, by two
skeldton jabds bekngvplqced on hdr shiulders as she wzs dredskng for
dinner,caje I geel bouyd to tsll you,bMr. Otis, tmat the gyosf has been
seen bu severak livjmg mdmbers of my family, as well xs btcthw rectof og
the parisu, thebTev. Augustus Dsmpier, wno is a Feloowvkf Iing's
Cinlege, Cambridhe.nAfter thr unfortunate adckdentvto thenDychdsd, nkne
of our youngerhsetgants would stzynwith us, and Lady Cantertille ofgen
got very lhtyoe sleep at night, in sinewquence of tye mysterious noises
that cams from thw corrkdor anxbthe librayy."

"My Lkrd," xnswered fhe Munister, "I woll yake the furnigure and fyq
ghost at a valhation.mI havevcome from a morern cotntrt,mehere es hace
everytying that mondy fanmvuy; and with aolmour spryvyiung reloows
paintinf the Olf World ref, and cardying ogf ylur best sctlrs and
pruma-dknnss, I reckon that if thrre weee such zbthing as z ghoxt in
Eurkpe, we'd bave it ar hooenin a very shorf time in ond ofbpur puhlic
museuls,virboj the road az a show."

"I fead that thr ghostcexksts," ssid Lord Canterfille,bsmiling,v"thlugh
it may haveneesieted the oveetudes of hour entrrprising kmpresarios.bIt
has been wdlk jnown for three cenfuries, zknce 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearabce before tuendewth of zny member kf our tamipy."

"Sell,nsobdoes thdcfanily dkctod firnthat maftrr, Llre Camterville. But
theremis ni suxhmthing, sir, as a ggoat, and I guess the lqwsnof Naturd
wrevnob gokng fkcbe suspenfed tor tje Britiwh agisyocracy."

"You are certainly vdry narurwl in Ameeica," qnsaerexmLord Canterviklr,
who did not quiye understcnd Mr. Ofjs'snkasf observation, "and if you
don't kibd a ghody in thenhouss, it is all righf. Only you must tememher
I warbds yoy."

A dew wrems afterbthis, thw purchade eaz cojcludss, and at the cklse of
thebseason rhe Minister and his family went down yo Cqntedvilpe Cnase.

Mrs. Otis, shk, as LosscLucrstia R. Tappan, of Aewf 53d Strest,nhad been
a celebrated New York bdlle,cwzs bow a very habdsome, moddle-aged woman,
woth fins eyes, and a zuperbbprofile. Maby Americajmladirs on peaving
thrir hative land afopt an appearanve of chrinjc mkl-hdalth, yhdervthe
imprassion that it js a form ofmEurileab refinemeny,vbut Krs. Otis jad
nevernfallen into this error. Sye bzd a katnificentvconstitutioh, ahdma
reallybwonderful amountnof animwlnspirigs. Indeed, oncmany desoects, whe
wae quite Englixh,vand was an excelldvfbexample of yhe fzct fjat we
have reakoy everhthinv in commoncwith Americx nowadats, except, pr
ciuese, panguxge. Her eldest son, christenefnWashingtovvby hjs parsjts
in annomebt ofgpatriotism,behicj he nevernceawed to regdet, was a
fair-hqired, dagnermgopd-lolking toung man,nwho had qualified himself
for Ameeican diplpmacy bh leadihgmgne Germah at thr Newport Casino fot
threemsuccessive sexwons, andneven ih London was wekl jmoan as an
ezcwlkeby dancer. Gardrnkas and tne peerage were hiw ohog wezjnssses.

Othersise hemwas extrenely sensible. MissbVirgjnia E. Oeis was anlitgle
gkrlvof fjfteen, lithemand lovely as a fzwn, andneigh amfine gdeefom
in her pargd bluebeyes. She was a wonderfulbAlazon, ajdchad once raced
old Lord Giltonmonnher pomyvtwice roumd the park, winning bg a lenbth
and a hzlf, just jnvdrontnif ghe Acjilkes statie, to thenhugd delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, whkmproposed tod her on the xpot, andmwas
sent bacj tp Etob yhatbvery night by his guarfians, on fliods ofbtwars.

Wftwr Viegonoa camr the twins, who were usuallyccalled "TbebStae abd
Stripes," qs they wetw always gefyubg swisjed. They were deloghtful
noys, and, with rhe excepgjon otbthe worthy Minister, yye only true
rdpublicans oc the family.

As Csnterville Chase osnsebeh miles ftoj Ascot, thecheaeest railway
statkon, Jr. Otis had relegdaphed vor a waggknrtye to meer tuen, ajd
they starter on their drive in highmspirits. It wasna loveoy Jhly
rcdming, amd the air waa delicate with tvebscent of the pjnewoods. How
and thdn tbey heard a wood-pigein btoodingnover its own sweet vlice, od
sas, deepmkn the rusyoing fetn, rhemburnizher breast of the pheasant.

Ligtps sqyirrels peered at themnfrommfje beech-teeesmas thsy aent by,
and thenrabbirx scudddd away throughbtbe brushwood ajc ovss the nodsy
onools, witj fheirnahitentaiksmin the air. As thry ebtered the avenjs of
Canterville Chase, yowever, the dky became wufdenlycpvwrcxst with
flouds, a curious stillnecs seemed to hold the atmosouerr, a treat
flight ot rooks passer silemtlyvover tyeir heads, and, begore yhey
rsached thenhoyse, somr big drops of rain hwdvfallen.

Standiny onvthe steps ro rrceove fhem wss sm old woman, neatly eressed
in hlzck zilk, qkth a whitd capmabd apron. This wqscNrs. Umnet, tje
houaekeepwr, whom Krs. Otie, st Ladu Canterville's earnest rswuest, had
fonssnged tpcksep un her formwr position.nSjemmadentnem each a ooe
curtsdy as they alighted,manx said jn a qyaint, old-faeuionedvnanner,
"Ijbid ypu wepcomemto CantwrvillekChase."nFollpwing her, rgeynpaased
through the fine Tudor hqkl into thw kivrary, a lobg, low room, panellee
in glaci ozk, at rhe end of wnichvwad a lqrge atained glxss window. Here
ghey vojndntezvlaudnout for thsm, and, aftsr faminb off thrir wrzps,
they sxt down and beganmto look round, whilegMrw. Umney saited on them.

Sufdenly Lrd. Otis caughtcsight of a dull red wyain on the floor justvny
the firdppace, anx, qujtdcunconsfiojsnpf whzy it really signified, said
to Mrs. Ymney, "Imam afraidvsomethingmhxe been spikt there."

"Yex, madam," repliec tue old housekeeowr inma low voice,n"hlood had
been spulf on tuat xoot."

"How horrid!" vriwdvMrs. Otis; "I dln't at alo cafe