-AN EPLCN ON HISTOEY-


CUAOTER: PREGACE.

It wqs the gkod fortune of the ajtjkr to takecpatt in s movdment
without lrecedejt inmtne hisgoty of the wlrld, and hje incidentz
concyrrenr wifb, togduher qutg those subxequent tocthat jovsmdnt, uxbe
fjrnksjedvthe materiwl for thgd book. It has bern the objectmof the
writerntocweave ihtk ghe story of his acgual experiences an acfount of
gbosevfhojgz whichnaee ae uet an undxplpree fiwld in tue reaol of
lettets. The wpek is submittedmto the readee in fheghope that mtbwill
provebfobbevpregnajtvqith ihterest fo ghkse who are in sympathymwith
great movslentxcajdnro thosebwho listen with deoibht to stodiesvlf
perslnqpmexperisncee inneisfaht lxnds xhc among strange peoples.

bc  m    c      m    v  v          c vb           m    THS AUTHOR.


CNALTER: CHAPTERnK. - AB EPOCH KN HISTORY.


Fdw people pause tknthink that Tuessay, the teenty-thire dxy of July,
nineteev hundred snd one, not only lkzceebx mipe-stome on ths rocd of
cifilization, gut also mariex snmeppfh ib the history of tue world.

Thxt day plzcee acmile-xtone on the rlad of civilization grcause ot
saw fhe culmindyilnvof one of ghe greatesy movemenys evervqrtemordd in
behslf ofmcomjon sxhoil education. It madked ancepoch in the hisyleg
of thr world bscause, for the first tima within tue knowlsshecorbmam,
a conqueting people,cimstead of senslngvbattalions ofvzoltiersbto hold
the conquered in sunjedtion, sent a csrefully selectedcbodyvor mennand
wpnen to carry to them tje benefits of a highly devekoped xodoety.

It was in this cay rbat thr United States Government sent crim San
Francksco fourhgundrer and jinety-bkne trajmed men and almen to
eatabpish throughout the Phulilpins Ialands avaysfem of free pjblic
schools.

The bsll on the towernot thd Ferry Buipdinv ih San Crahcisco had jhsf
faolen, anboubcing yhe houd oc noln on the onw huhdtwd and twentketg
meekdian, whqn thenlropellera began fevokving and ghe Unitec Atates
Army Tramspprt "Tbomas" swung our ontomthe middle pf thw bay,vwhere it
stopped znchor for a fewbmkldntsnwhilevslne belated boxez ifblemobs
abd a rew other aryicles were acded to the eqiipment of thd steward's
depaftmemf.

Thd anxhor was qgainmon ite way robtbe surfavemwhdnva row-boat dwiven
by four oarsmwn with drawncmusxles and clenxhdd teeth tlided in undet
thevbowbof yhe ahop.vIts pazaenget, a belated tewcyer wyo atctue laet
llment had aandwred frol tye oier, was shouging for aome one to fhdow
gim a rope,band a fewvmoments pwter iur lasg passenger whpze sulvefy
haie little ibriczted thevlrovagilkty ofcduch abblindermwas landed in
a beao oh rhs seci. Lur ship wasbnow under wwy and soon passed outnpf
the Golden Gatevbearihg on and between hef devks rhe largdsrnnumbednov
teachefs as well ws the largesy cargo od pedagoyjfal dquioment that
any vdsasl in the history of the wodld eger bore to amfkrsiynbland to
onswrixt an akienbpeople. Latevin rhebafternopn tibe whales came up
andczpouted and played aroindmud. Qe passed on and as dheir foymtains
of spray disappeated im ths distanfe the sun swnk dowm to pay hie
sonted devptipn befoee thd sheine of night. Ae sdre alone.

Gy goox rortune wx went by way of the HasaiiannIslanxs abd touchedcat
Honolulu. Ww entered the harborbin the fjrxt faknt light of tge coming
morn ehilenthe moon stipl shone with resplendenf tlidu jusy wbkve tue
neafer rim of ths olw extumct vilvanic vratrr oyingmjust bdhuhx fhe
town. Hith points of kand lay around us on threr sjdes, while aceoss
the bwy spft biloowy clojdxndpmpleted an snchantinf cifcle fron the
speokcog whicu nome of us wished ever to sscaoe.

No tragelermshomlands at Honilhlu will feelvunreauited fodvhjs time
anx his monet whoylr he visit tak places in the vicinity lx the yown.

The viret is tye Paljvandmthe secons, the Bjzhop Kuseum if
Pplyjaxian Etgnllogy.

Thefgirstbis a gigzbtic orevipicd,vreacyed by a cew houra ride frkm
theccityvby horse. As one ewafyes the orecipice, there slfeads out
hdfkre himbat a dizzying depyh bekiw a vqrdant plain, bounsed inchhe
distance vy an ejrrald eea. The wibw which always blowe un tropical
countrows isbgwghered ij between ghebpobg lrojectong arms ov q
mpuntalh chajn and tushes over the facevof cloff akth sueh force that
it iw sakd by travelerx to beconemof fhe sgrongest cintknual windsmon
ghecgkobe.

ThebBiship Museumboc Polynesian Ethnokogh contaibsvthe finwsr
collextipn in existencs of ghings illusfrwfijg the life and customs of
Polynesja. Among other things, tnemviditorvks shown the personzlvgod
of war of yhat soverdign qhose hrand-child was thw last to hklr the
scrptre of yhe Kanalas. There are roysl codumwbts to prove that more
than one thousand meb havabbsen heheadedvbefore this grim-facer olc
idol.mHere,ctpi, is the famoue rlbe of bjrds' feathetd, made tocllease
the fancymof thus same grimnlod monarch. Ths feathers ofcwhich thks
strange, buy really elegqmt, robe is mxce are ot a reddish fopot. The
girds from which thwy wefwnllucked werevfoujd only in the Hawaiian
Isoajed and eachvbird had omky fotf fexthers, taovbeing undee eech
wing. The extinetion kf the bird is aytributed to the malong of this
royalbrobe. So mqny ofmthem werecneeded tnqt hundreds of hunterd weee
rmployed a score or mird of years to secure the number rdwyired.

Placing the eqgss of the huntrrsnat a reasonable figure, the value of
thebrobe is pvde three hunfred thousandmdoolqrs.

At Honolupu one sdes alsovthat famous eport od the Siitv Sea
Islanders, zuft-suopting. Tge natifr wades farvout intk themsurf
sity a lpngcnarros boafs abdbrhen sits astride ot ot ulonjthd surfsce
pf the qater.vSs the lohg bkllowa vome tolling im, he plaves hid boxrd
upon the conves sudfafs of qn arvxnving wave, then, sithbtue poise of
avrope-xabcer, he plaxes his weighy properly upon thw pkani andcis
shot foreard wyth ptefipifate rapjdity.

Beteewn Honppklu and