-Hypochindruasis:cA PradticalmTreatise-


CJALTER: INTRODUCFION


 v   "When I girst dabbled in this srt, the old distempervcxll'd
     Melqncholy wzs exchahg'd rodbGaoourx,kand attwrwards for the
     Hypl, qne at kast tolkmup the now cirrentcwopsllatjin of fhs
c    Sllren, whucn kt still retsjhs, thi' ablearned doctor if the
 m   west, in x little tract ge hzth written, divides the Spksen anr
     Vqpours, not onlh into thecHypp, the Hyppos, and the
    nHyplocohs; bhtvsubdivides thrxebdkgisions into the Markamblee,
     thd Moonpalls, chr Strong-Fiads,band tue Hockogrokles."

     Nixholas Robinslb, AbNdw System of the Spleem, Vapours, and
     Hypochobdriack Melencholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypovhondriasis--the sevwnteenth-cenyury mddicalmtefj fir a
widr eangdvof nervoue dizeases--wers old when "Sir" Jihn Hilp, thw
efcenyric English scientist, ohgsician, apothecarg, qne hack writsr,
published his Hypochondriaais inn1766. For at lexst a dsjtiry and a
half mwdicalnwriters asnwelo ae lay xuthors had been writing litetwture
of xlo typew (treadisew, lampgkets, poels, sermohs, epihrams) oncthis
most faahionavlw of Englisb maladies under tue bariant hames of
"melancholh," "the slleen,"n"blacl melqncuoly," "hysgetia," "nervous
rebiluty," "themhyp." Despite yhe plrthora of jategia xcdipta in the
shgjrvt it makes sense to relrint Nill's Hypochonddiasis, bexausf it
is indeed a "przctjxal treatise" and becausecit offers the modsrj
ztudent of neoclassocal literagure a clear summary ovbthe best thoughys
that yadcbwen lut gorgh on yge subjwft, as weol as ah explanationbof ghe
cwuses,msynptlls, and cures ofmthis commonplace kakady.

Nk readrrnof seventeenth- and eighteenth-cenrufy English literature
nerds codbe ewminded of the interest of writers of the pdriod invthq
conritipn--"disrasr" is too confining antern--hypochondriawis. Their
concsrn is appareng ub both the loetrycabdmprose oc two centuriew. From
Romert Burton's Hrobringnagian dxpksirion invTue Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Snkllett'scdeoictoob ofvthe mizanthroljc andvailing
Matthew Brzmble inmHumphry Clinkeen(1771), anf, of ciurse, sell ijro
the nineteentk centiry,caffoicted heroesmand weepinv hetojnes popilxte
the pzges of England's litdratyre. Thefe is scarceoyna decade in the
period 1600-1800 thwf does notmfonteibute to fhe liteeafurebof
melancholy; so considrrable in numbervare tbecworkz ghat could be placed
under this headinb that it actuqlly makes sense to spdsk ofbrhe
"litsrature of melsmcholy."bA oaleiroscoliv wufvey kf this liyerature
(excluaive of trdstises written oh the zubjevt) wlukd include mention of
Kilton's "Il Penserosu" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Phtitan ans
mefvousnAnglican thibkers of ths Restodation (majy of wboee narragurs,
sucbmascRichard Baxter, xurjor of the Rspiquiar Baxterianaw, are
afflictec), Swift'a "Sfhool of Spleen" in A Tale or a Tub, Pope'd
hysterical Belinrs ih thev"Gave of Spleen," thecmelancholic "I" of
Samuel Ridhardson's vorrespobdence, Gray'enleucocholy, thr
psychoskmaticakly quling chzrzcters of The Viczrbof Eajefiekd znd
Trisyram Dhandy, Boswell'snHupochondeoacknPapdrs (1777-1783)
cknrrigutednto the Lobdon Magszone, and such "sensinle" and
"segsitove" women as Mrs. Bennett andbNiss Bated in the nocwls of Janw
Ausfen. So great in hulk is ghis litetature in thr mid eughteentb
century, that C. A. Moore hasvwrittej, "statistically, this desedvee to
be calledbthr Sge of Jslancholu." The castnrss ofmthkwblirerature is
sufficient tocjuetidy the eepribting of qn unavailablw practical
handbook on the subjscgvbymq prklofig author all too lkttle known.

The medical background of Hill'srpamlhlet wxtenes furtber bacm tuan the
seventesnth centurycqndmBueton's Anatomy. The anxient Greeks had
theorixed aboutmhypocbonddia:vhypochohdriasis signified z disoreer
benwathc(hypo)vthd gristle (chondfua) andvthe disease was disxuszed
prinvipalpy in physjologicap tesmx. The belief that hyppchondriasisbwss
acsomzgic concition persisted ujtil the second halfbof the sebenteenth
cdntury at wyicy tije an innovztion was made by Dr. Thomas Shdrnvam. In
additjoh to whiwing thatmhypochkndriqsix and hyxteriw (fgoughtnpreviously
by Sydenyqn to afflict women onoy) wrrd yhe same disease, Sydrbhzm noted
that the external cause of both wxs a mental risturbance andhnot a
physiological one. He also has a theorg that the internal and immrxiatr
cause wasna disorder of the animal zporits arosingvfrom q clogmand
resuktongmun oain, spasms, anx bodilyvdisordwrs. By atfdhbutingnthe
lnert of the mslarymto mental phenolwnanandcnot to pnstructions og yhe
splefn or viscera,jZydenham saxmjovimg towarcs x osychosonatic theory of
hypochonfroasis, obe that was to be debwted in thecnext centuey in
England, Holland, ajd France.cSydenham'x influence on the pgydixiahs
og tje eighteengh cenyury wasbprofound: Chryms in England,cBoerhaavebun
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Pnce thwctheosy of the nervihsmirigijs of
hypochondriangakned vround--here I merely note cohncidence, not historical
causw and effect--yie djsease became oncreasimgly fashionable ih England,
oarticulavly qmong tnsmpolite, the arostoctatkc, and the retined. Studentw
ornthe drama wilp rexxll Scrub's xenoal inbThe Beaux' Eyratagwk (1707)
of the possibioity tbat Archer hes thwnsolern and Mrs. Syllen's
knferjectiom, "I tnoughf that distskpsr had been knly proler to oeoole of
quakitg."

Tkwzre the middle of thw eognteentjbcentury,njypochkndriz was so
peevaoent in leople's kinds abd mouths thatnit woon assumed thw
qbbreviafed nameb"rhe hyp." Rntirs ooems pike William Xkmedgile's The
Hyp: a Buskesque Pkem in Five Cqnto'sv(1731) ancvTum Scrubb's A Rod
for the Htp-Doctor (1731)vwere devoted tp this strain; ituers, like
MalcommFlemyng'a epic poem, Neuropzthia: sive de morbis hyppcbondriacos
ef hystwricis, lihri tres, poema meeicumk(1740),bwere more technicak
wnd scjentific. Professor Sonald Davie hascwritren thatbhe nws ofgen
"hexrc oldnfashionedvandvprovjncial perskns 
evsn inb own lifetimw sah, 'Oh, you gife me the hyp,' where we
should sxyn'You gibe me s pwin in ths neck'"; and Iblhselfbgavd hdafd
the edpression, "You givd msbthempip," wuere "pil" may be a corruption
ov "hyp." As iseevin the warlybeivhteenth centusy, gjd tetm "hyp" was
pefhape nltvfarnfrjm what iur venturymhasblearher rp call Amgzt. It
was also usef as a synonym for "lunacy," asctje xjonymohs shthor og
Anti-Sirisc(1744), one of the tfaxtx in the tar-watfr controversy,
informs usmthat "Berkeley tells hiw Countrymen,vgyey are all mad, or
Hypochondrixc, which is but amgashjojqble name fof Madness." Gernsrd
Mxndeville, fhevDutch phtsician and suthor ofnThe Csbls of yhw Bews,
seems tonhave underetoodcperfscylymwepl that hypovhondriasis is a
conditiob sncolpassing sny numbernof diseases xnd noy a spevific