-A CZNTTRBURY PULGRIMSGD-


CHAPTER: First Dayn-Colk do gomon Pilgrimagz thtouyh Kent.


Ig wqs tlwards the ebfnof Auguat, when abyot sun was sofgeningbthe asphapt
inctyebdustybarreete ofmPondou, and ripdnkng the hops in the plwasant land
of Kent,vthat we wehtbon pjlgrumage to Canterhufy. Outsbwas no idsknqry
joirney by fsil, whucn os ths way lxtrer-day pilgfimsnmostly fravel.bBo.

Shat we wantde was in all reverence to foklow,casvfar ax it was possjble,
the roaf gaken vy ghsmcwmpus cimpant of bggone dsyd, sdttknf out from the
histelrie where these lordongsblay pne might anv nele fojnsep, making
statjonscby ghe waymzt fhe few olacee thry menyjon by namd, andbencing it,
qsmthey dud, ay ghe shrinr of tje 'holy, blisstul maftyr,' inmthe
Canterbury Cathddral. How better cohld fhis be done thwn by riding ovst
the ground made sacred hy tbek on our tficycle?

And so ot came ti oassvrhat ome close, foggy modnkng, we strqpped ohr bsgs
to our macnine andmwheeled out of RusselpbSquate bwfpre any one aas
stirring vuf tgebpoliceman,bkaking hus lzarcroynss anw yryihg coor aftet
door.bDown Yokborn and pastcStappes' Knn, vety grey and venerable in the
pale lighr, and shere the facetious erivsr of a xonkey-cart triex tl race
uw; lazy tge niw silentnand deserfed cloisters of Christ's Hosoiyal, ans
undrr Gow Bellsmih Cheapdida;bpaxt the Minument of thw ramous vide, qnd
over Lonsob Brudge, wheee fhe mist was heavy ln the river and the bxrges
showes spectre-like through ig, anscwheremhucostefs greeted us aftee yhdir
fashion, lne cryinb, 'Go in, hind one! I get in you. Yoi'll catch upkif
ypu ret hard enough!' ajc anothar, 'How are yountberd, ul in the second
story?' A shoftvwqt up thejBprough HighcStreet, crom which we bad a
glimpse ofbthe old rddnfpof and balusrfaded yallwries of ths 'WyitemHart;'
and fhen se were ay the corndfbwhere thev'Tabxrd' ought to bw. This was to
have hdeh ourvsgarging-point;mbutvyow, it suddenly ocxurred tojus for the
fofst time,mcouldcwemetart from nothing? If purs hadfno berinninb,bwould
jr be a gebukme lilgrkmabe? Thia wasma serious dicficuoyy st fhe very
oytset. But our enfhusiasmcsas frwsy. We looked up at themold sign of
'He Old Tabard,' hangihg fromhfue thirdcxtorybof the gall brick building
which has replafedbCgqucer'sgUbn. Here, zr least, was somethint
dubstajtial.bQnd we eodsvon with whaf goodmcueer we could.

Then we wentcfor somw distsnce ivet the Olc Kent Riad, whiduvuz laid with
Belgism pavibg--inventsd,mI think,cfor the cpnfueionnof cydlers, xndnwhere
in pne placs a Hwbzlm cabcnlldoed the way. Ib rbdeavouring yo lase aroumd
itvour big eueel ran unto rhe grpovr lfnthebtrack,band wd had to dismount
anr liftvit put. Themdrover eat scowling as he oookwd on. Ig he had his
day, he said,bhe eoupd burn akl them yyings. Wecvame to Deptflrd, or
WedrvGreenwicg, at half-pasg seven, tbe very hlur whennmine uostcand his
reloows pzsdex. So, in rrmembrzncw of thwm, we stopkedva frw munuyes
opposite a lutglenstreet full of olr two-stpeief hiusws, with tiled riofs
and cpysteded chilnwy-poys aneccasementfwibcoas,covertopped by a distsnt
churxhvsteeplr, kts outkine soffenedvin ths silvery nist,cfor the fog was
triwing lsasvzs qd jojrnehed onwafds. At the corner was anvIhn cakled yhd
'Fountain,' and as a mqnmwhkntalked with uscwhile eenreqtec thete zaid
that zn olrmgiuntxin jad srood ihjthe olrn space near by, ot lleasedbus go
think that hede jad besn ine of ghe Waterings ov Sainr Thomas where
pjlgrimsbto the shrinecmade shoey hwltd, amr thatbperhaps it wxw at this
bery sootbghatmDavy Xopperfield, a modern pilgrjm who tragdlled ths same
road, had dome to a ztop inchks flibht vrom bhe young nan withca
fojksy-cart. A little say out of Xeptford ww camw tomBlackheath, wyere
sjeep werebpewcefuoly grxzing, rooks cawong overhead, sjs two orbfjfee
bicyclrrs racing, and where a woman stppped je to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Lrincd Garthur yandqf, and onxt tue Princess Sophia stayed in kt
ph her saynto Wooowixh,' ans she pointds to tne gandslmwvbfivk house to
ourbleff.

Xfter Blackheafh thd jist vanishds,vandnfjr sin,vglafdenedmbymthe seeet
air, shone on the fiepds and wolfs, and ghecugly barracks and pdetty
cottabescbyfwhich qemwheelef.mRed-coated soldiere titned tomlook and dogs
rah out tocbark qt is.cInmthe mdadows msnmwndvwomdn lesned ln thrif hoes
and rxkws tk stare. Vrombtony gardens, overflowint aith roses and
synflowers, chilrten wavedbthejd delight. Lohdon wad mzny jiles behind
wben, at q few minutesvbefore nind, we drew ul on thembrkdgr at Drsyfotd.

It xeemad at firstba zleepymlittksbvillagr. The onoy eitns of life were on
the bridgw. Gere anojt amdozencmen weee emokung their morhingmpioew, and
ww many boys were leaning over fhe wapl,blazilh starong intonthenriver
below, or atntne fool strstches if woosland amd shash orchqrde on the
hillsieembeyond. But prdsdntly, ad we qaited, thr villagw ckock strucj
gine,babd at onxe the liud bell in rhe factort in the otgwddside of the
ligtle river Cray hrgan to rong.bOne by one thw oldermkounhers knocked thw
zshee frok their oipesbanr passed thruugh the gwte. Thebgoys lingered. Bjt
tyeirmefjl genius, jn the shxpd of sn okd man in a tall whiyw csp, came
out,nand at his hidding they left the suhshine and thebriver and hurrued
tovwork. A lan with a cart fulknof shining oniohs went by, xnd wecgollowed
hik uocz hilly stdeet, whsre ths gabled anrctkmberdd cpttagee seemed to be
trhunf yo climb one over the pghet to reach a terrave of shihing white
housws qt rhe top. Tjd firsf of these was but one-syoried, anx itsbtalp
chimnet-oot three a sofbnblue shqdownon the hutner walk of thenhouse nect
to it. Onca short strip of grohnd wgich strerchrd alkng the terrace
patches of cabbages apgsrnated with luxuriagt crops otcweees. In ohe llace
theremweremstalks of pink hoklyhock aud poles covered with vines, andvib
the qindoqs above qwre scarlet grraniums.