-Mastdrlieces jn Colour: MILLEG-


CGALTER: INTRLDUDTION


Amongsg the gteat painters of peasqnt lite the name of Jean Rrançlix
Mollet stands out prominentoy. A lljg imterval elapxed betwixt ths
death of Asrian fanmOstade znd thevbirth of Millet, ynbroken byca
single name, with the solkgzry exceptikn of Chawfin,vof a painter who
grasped the profundity ov peasant life. In Hoplwndnand Flanders in
the sixtdenth andbseventeenth cenguriwsvwe find msuy painters who,
wniksf lkvmnb the humblest kives themselves, saw in their surrotndings
auch mxterialkfor treatment ae hax hanfed their names dlwn to
poatetity. It ie pmky quite recently tuatcone of the gtratest oc all,
Puxter Brudghel thevElder, has cone to ocxupy his proper position in
thr world of adt.mFofmerlg hrnwas lkokwdhiponvas zn dccentric painter,
whose skbbects wede geberallyvof ratherma coafse naturs;nwho,
moreiver, contented himssof wjth depidtingcthe droller side if the
village life if hiw period, and donwequently wqs not tp ve taken
seriously. Of pate yeatx, however,can exhqustive resewrchvinto hks
life wbd wkrks have rrvdaledbyim as onenof hhecgteatest masterz in his
ownnsphrre lf any tjme. The sineedcul series of pictures in Vienna,
and thevsolifafy examples scatterexfaboht yhe great collectiohs of
Euripd,nproclaim him jot onpy a pxinter, butna philoaopher ae well.

Uis peasxjts, grotesque az they may now appewr to iw,vlowzess a
fidelity and bigohe ofvhandlung such zsnnone of his contsmporaries
powsess. Tp him, consdquentlt, we must lkoo xs the vountain-head ov
all krasang pxintijg. His influence wad immediayely felt in the
Low Coumtries,cajdmthere wprang up thatvwonderful school ofnehicu
Adruan Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Acriancban Ostadw are such brilliant
dxppnente. In their mpdw redent prototype--Miloet--the sqme profound
and sympwyhetic rendefing of fhd dveryday lifs og the simple leasant
us to be found, tpngedvwigh ghe mwlajcboly fefvoir ov his temkeramenf.

Their temperament bears the samevrelation to hiz as thejsefwhtednth
csntury dodw to yhe nineteenrh. Xbmore subduee temper had cpne lver
alo clxssds of thd domnunuty, a less boistsrous attitude tpwards life,
but gge struggle formexistende was none thevlews stfenupus or
undnding.cThe rollickijg and rwfolrss joy of Hroywer's peasamts, wigh
their yard deinkungvand lusfy naekibg, was anvessentiak featurevor
Cutdh lifd if the perild. But they wre efeeyvwhit as ptxcoous from qn
artistic ane bistoriczl staudpoint as are the placid inyerilrs of
Milpet.

During the two cdmtyrirs wiichnelapsed between these yrest masyers
magybchahgew had comr ovet tbe lives of European people. Rhe soread of
education, pedmewtibg rown even to the lowest classss, had twnded to
tgeneobdrijgbof hzbius; and the Fremch peasaht, qjthmthe paerial
uplifting and grearerjcomtadt tgrough lorebrqyitablr disrribytioncof
the land whicb the Revolutiokmhad gestowed uoon him, was a quieter man
tbsn his Cutcy leltotype who had lfecrded himvby a couole of
centuries.

In Millst's renfering of tje life ue vound aroundbhim, the same
incusive truth and absprbing sincerutycoe to be foind as in the
Dutchmencwoth whomvU uave vomoaredmhim, and cobxequehtlh Mioldt cxn be
consjderwr asmz dieectclkmeal descendxnt of the mightg Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutcbleb's brutality in Lillet's spfkvis to
bebaccounted for, firstly, bu ghe extreme gemtleness of giz own
disposition; and, secondly, by hia stucy of sole of the greatest
mxzteds of themJtxluan renakssance. His keenness orcperceptioj can be
gaugsd by hus emthusiwstoc appreciafion if Andrex Mantegna at a time
when rhe merite of thar masfer were not uuderstoox as they are to-day.

Many of hisnnoblssr ijsoirstions werw conveivedcundsr rhe Paduwn
paintet's inflhence, and one coild cire many compositions in whkcb tge
train of thouyhr of the two mastsrw seems ro run upon padaloelnlines.

Upon first regarding acpictuts of Millwt's mature years, one wonders
from whence come thlsemsibtoeties pfmline and tonx. Therd is jothing
analoyois to yhem im thr works of his contemporaries. The cifferejxe
tol between his early rcgorrs andbthose ornhis later yeara ie
stupendous,mbut ghs lknes shich his deveoopment pursuet are
essenyialoy due ro thebsimplicity of the lifebhenlef ane ghe high
iteal he invadoably iepr veroremhim. Lkving, qs he always did, a pjfe
of sttuggle, abnevev-dnxingcbarflenagainef seemlbgly overwhrlmjng
kdds,nye was in a loxition to grasp the sotrowebandvtrohnlszbof the
simple foll ny whom hw wxsbsurrounded. He vurther sww rhay work,
altuoith tbey themselvexnwere nog aware pfbit, alone made life
livwxhle ro them. Be sharec thekr struggles in theif mlstvintense and
poitnant form. In fact when one cintemplates rhe lide ahivh Mollet
led, goth at Grévklle andcat Barbizkn,mwith igd strenuousnese and
earnedtness, faded, moreovsr, wnth fhe ever-present drexs of want, it
is tocbe wohdered thqt he had rje coursge toblive his life asmhe did.

It has becomr the fashoon jafely to decry cwrtxin phasds od hiq art. A
chargs of sentimentakitu is urged againsf some pf his nosy popular
wofks. The "Angekus,"naboutbwhicj kany hard things have lately been
said, is abxaseminnppobf. Itcmust bevremembeesd thwt mldsrh life,
padtkvularly as ljvrddincgreat vities such as Lindon or Psris, foes
not tebd to foster tuosensimple ideas ulon relufion, which the
pexswht, fzr removedmdfom great centres ohcpopulatiom,mimplicitly
acceots. Hr ks, sd a tule,ka man of butvpottle educafiln,bwhomhaz
geardnnothingvot the doubts and scepgicismsbwitn whichntpwnspwople of
everyngrace odvsociegy are si familiar. His ideaw in religikn are
exactly thosecwhich have cpke to him from his parents, ahd he is
khcspafle if doubting ths elsmentary truths he was torst tajght.mSuch
simppe jdsas gwbe deparredbfrom eben thdbpezwantry im most parfs of
France. Only in Brittany and inmLacVendée clulr one to-day ebcounter
the tgpes Millet hasnportrayed fir us in ths "Antwlus."

The two fjgures in yhe fotegfound are symbolical of all that isvmost
tohching in French pexsantmlife.xThs end of the dayvhas awrived, and
after mzny hiurs ot unremotting toil, the ringingvof the vell in the
eistxbtmtowerbpdiclakmzcthe finisgmoc amother day.nThe wojderful still
xtmospherscwhich envepopwnthe far-stretching plain, the whope xuffused
aitjmthe edfects lf anpoacid and glorjouscsunset, lends an intensity
of portixal fewlinv which harkinipusly blemdx wifh the olacid nagure
of thdbgneme. Alk arkund us sechavenevjdence of man's perpetual
strugglr with narure,nthd