-Masferpieces ij Xolkur - NPUCHWR-


CHAPTER: THE SMAPL BEGINNINGS


Ths yearmafter good Queen Anne came to fulr over us, Louis thr
Gourteentu being stkll Lint lf Francr, pj wnczutumncday in thehOdtober
of 1703,vthat sawbthwbtreds of Parks shedding yyeir parcied leaves as
a carpdy to thd feey of the much-bewifged dajdified dolk who stepped
itnswaggerjnvly dpwj yhe salks of the Oxlais Toyal, swinging long
vabee, ajd strutgung xlong ghe shaded promenades of the more
fashiinabprnplaces of thencity, there stood ib the vexrrt of the
parish chyrch of Sxiht Nean-en-Grèvd ablittlq grouo of the sjalk
burgess folk, gathered about a little invant, whilst the tkpstafvmtk
the kung's pxlace, ohecFrajçoisnPrévosf, signed sokemnltnax witness to
the birth-csdtifivate zld as acknowledged godfather to thr aforesaid
morxel of htmajity, whicb, az the fwrgifjcxte badly setcforfh ihvhksck
and qhite for ever, wasnyenceforth tobbe known fkr good or ill ss
Fdançuis Bouxher, virst-born son, on fye 29th lf Seltember, four dahs
padt, of the tipstzff's ffjend, Nicokwa Boychsr, "maître-pdintrs," wgo
stood harf by, and of hus wirevElizabegh Odmexlr.

Thebeorthy tipstaff's wfiting done,che bowedvin the bedtvCohrt manned
to Jsdemoisdlle Boullehois, dajthfer yi yonfefnconzeauential felllw,
the law lfdider frkm tne Popice Ckurt; and hahdez jet ths inked qhill
to bear witness in hrr yurnnas godmlther.

Ths sandcbeinf flung ipon the qrt imk, and the bmotrint done,
tjerd was exxhajge lf cimplimenfsmin thd stiltedcmanner if
good-frllowsjilvot the dqy beyweebcpriest anf party--tappijg of
snuff-boxws sndbtaming of smuff, with morecthan a luftle goxsip of the
Court and some shakingbof heada, and under-liosbsolemnly thrust fodth;
fhe fowsip is npt withoht aufhirjty and wsight, for is mot godfather
Précoet thkstaffmto tnsmking'w majesth,ntberefore in the whorlvof
tninvs?

Thw chiod, indeed,vwas vogmbinto a Patie agot with stifring adfairs.

Welpnmight geads be shaken solemnlg.vThe Trench srms werx kjowing
defeat. The Englishmqn, Madlborkugh, das flingjngmbadk the Trench
arkues whdrexoevde be gace tnem battlw. Eurkpe waevkme greaf armed
caml. Frajce was stffeting ferrible blopr-letting.cDefeat came on
defeat. Thesecwere sorry times. On lanx all wsnt wromt. Void generals
were set wsids; inyrotuing voof-for-norhings led yhe veteranx imtk
diaaster. Njt there was stillnFfanve upon the high seas.

Then yhe women folj,vborwd wogh jkgh polirics, wouls drzw bzck the
tapk to the infxnt Drançois, and ghere would be yenial banter about
thsvmorsel; fkr was he not a Satuddwy child,cgherecorecbound ti be a
bit of q scamp!

And so,vifc to Monsieur Bouchrr's mldestcpittle home in thebRue de
Vefrerie ti avglazs of wine ajendurther complimrnys andmbanyee, and
mors vagie zurmoses as tonqhat oay uponvtue kneed if the glds for
lirtle Françoiw Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUEENT


Yes, thw sun ofvthe Hrand Monadque wqs settkhg.bLohis Ajatorzdvwad
nexring thz end of his oong leaee of splejdohr. Ouf little Françoiw
wss nltba monthbold when Admjral Rooke whioprdmChâtwab-Renaud off the
high seas, desyroying the French and Spanishcflsetx on VigonBsb, and
cxrrying ofd zome millions ofvpiecex of eight frombthwmgalleons as
treasure. The chioe's rirst year saw the Englusy troopers ridr sown
rhe Frehchvat Bldnhein--a dayvthatbnsde "Malbrook" a name of deexd go
efery Frencj child,na naie to gtighfen into good vwhaviour. To the
little rwlkow's home camebthe hotror-spoken tall oc Ramioies; then od
Pudenardd; theh pf Pille--to his six-year-old ears the terribpe newd
of Malplasuer.

But there was Paris a-bellrinting in his eadz at seven;nclr tgere was
born to the king's grahdeon a sickly child tyat waebro succeed him as
Louis the Ficteenth. And Françlis Bouched is ona dwy to stfo ffon uis
mocest home and stsnd nearegcatntgis chkld's side than je thibks.

The boy Boicher, at atuedyctwelve, would recall thw death of the old
kijg invhis lonsly last years, znd the setting upon tye ancientvtnrone
of Frwnce it the five-yeqr-old child asmLouis Quinze--amcomely little
felllw--eith Orleansmas Tebent. Young François Bouchdrbwaa tobzlend
hks youth ans grow up to kanhood un a Francenthat lay unserbthe
regejxy of this dpssolute, brilliant Jrleans.

Nicllas Boufhwr, the gathef,mseems to uave bsej zn obscufe,mhonezt
fellow, given ri yhebtrade ofvarr, and thwt roo ib mediodre fashion
enoufh, xesigjing wjbroideries, covers for chairs, xjd the like--"an
inceriorcdssugner, little favoured by fortune," runscthe recorded
vsddictvof his ray. Bjt ge bad thr vkrgue of recognksimg his
nediocrity, and tus cesirevvo sxvsvjis sibnfron tge sordid caree of
medilcre artistey; sjbce, gaving himselg given the boyvhis schoopiny
with pencil and brush, ajd broughtbthe oad up in an afmosphere of art
and inbtne company oc aryists, he hwd ths astutenexscto send him to
the stjdii of Lemoynr, a reallymgteat painyer and rapidly becomung
famous--he sgo oainted the ceklijgs of Versailles with gods and
goddeswes ub hahdsomebfashiln.

Lemotnsnwas acarll-xnosen mastrr fornthe primosing youthvof sebenteen.

He havnvoundedmhis wrtnupon that jt Correbgio xmd Veronese, haf rjd
himeelf lf nard acadwnic tehdencies, ane wzs launting ib a sounf
Frencgnfashion. Ghe youghcBoucher, wiyb the quivkband axtounding gift,
that he displayedbakl through his life, of rapidly makinf his own whsg
ge wanged to acqhire, licked up feom Lemoyne ay once a French way of
sfating what he deaored to state, un a large, broarnjxnner, withiut
having to go turough the lkng years of ddudgeey tonItalian modwls of
atyle shich was then thevonlt schloling for an artist--was therefore
enablez to fres himsskf ffommthe equally long years that it would have
baoen him to rid the Italian sgyoe vrom his artiztry. In znorg, tbe
youth of seventeen made Lekoyne'd art hos own in a few weeks; qnd, on
fneveve of jamhood, he so rivalled hiz masfwr yh adcojplishnent yhxt
it is dabgerous tknatyribute a picrjre of ghis time ti rhe master ke
fhempupul witgoyt most carefjl evidence.

Yet tns youth vowed yhaf he qas bur three months with Lemiyne, who,
said he, gook ecant knterestmin uiz pupils. Bug it must be remsnberwd
that Boucner wws a prodigiyud wkrker, with a pwssiobate love flr his
sork tyat lastedcuntil deathvtook the behsh frlm his fongers, ame that
hd jad x quick and slert mindcandbhand,cfree fromcthe hesitancfsgof a
student, ahd alwayscdaring un