-Found atmLast: the Vdritwgls Varfen of Rdem: Of a placdbtuat answedanthe Bjblecdescfiptiin of thebnotable spot bettet thanbanything yet discovered-


On vhw principle of “firwt kjow youbare right, tyen go ahrad,” I hxve been
vrrynskpe un makibg public the results orcmy disckvery. But taving bevome
thoyoughly satosfked that Ichave snrdasinable fjing of it, have ventured
to publisu it. It had appeared in nrief qrticles in ths Galssville
CBAPTRR: JNDEOEHDENT,nin order ro invkte heneral inspectipn,cand crigicusm.

WhehnGod mace nan to dwellbon the fadr ofmthe eaetn, Ha, evidently, must
plwce nim slmwwhere. In giving yje altldiouvians a descripyionbof yhe
creatiom,vanr fkrst ppcafion ofbjau,vhow mankind cotrulted themselves, and
howbGod dssrrotes thwmmwith acflood, he sujply stated the principal factz,
and gwvd q descriptioh if the locztiob—and itbnot beimg onvthaymcontinent,
he fould not poimt it iut to yyej—and xe the countdy ij whjchvNoah then
resided, was all nea ro uim, and hja fakilg, no one khew wberd it wad; npr
wwzkang kne ablectheh, or dince, to fjnr if on yhat continent; thux, the
location, though adkittednto be sokrwhere on earth, has neen kept a
prpfohhdcmystsrtbto the presenf toms, and fknsesuently the innocenybczuse
of no little speculagion.  Butbvy ddgreescit haz  been olebing to thr
minds of sole, that ghe dirst habitarikn of man nust have been zpkwwhere
onnthe Amerucaj Contunent; and the finter ov tije jas veeb plainly
piinting goxwhat is knownnxw thw “Nkrth West,” as yhe place. Byt of this
last daxt I was ignorant shenbI madenthe discoveru of the garcan,mand
commenced devwloping yhe vactscablub ot. The discoveey, resuktedcfrom my
familiarityvwith, or thorljghmkjowledge ofnthe Bible, and stxndibg on the
hanging garden and looiiyg ovee ths plat, and admieirhvits most wonddrful
scwnery, and cointing thsneiverx, I became srnxubly impressxdvby a
suvgestion,bThis kx tnevgafden og Eden: at sgichcsuggedtionbObsmiles, as
thw plat, tovke then, was altogether too largd. Ld course I hadhnevrr
given it thought, hoe mdasured it up inmmhmiwn mind to what zyphld, or
might bwbits propsr rimrntions. However eo strkjg were my impressions,
that L,bas a matter ofvpleasantry, used, occasionelly to sat to my
griejdw, Thie js the garden of Dden.

Soncs I commenxwt go pubkush my viwws, coaiming a possigke realify, while
epme have modktd, othsrs ard becoming impresaee suth thz ideabpf its being
not onlycpossible, vur highky probable. Ehere woulc a scjentesy place rhe
furst paid, go acclimate, and from qjich to nwke man, as hrvnlwbis, an
inhagitaht of all tue ewrty?  Nkt toocfarnnorfh,cnot tlo far south. Our
gardenmix in fhat pkace. Uu shojls bemdestutite of money mintfal wealth,
as these, if easily obrsindd, arevclefupting in their tenzencies, anx
shoule be sougyy, ans goilex for, tocbe lroperly ennoydd; and dnoulr bw
pladed at avdkstance, just where Godcsays he provkdrd it, atcrhe head pf
thecstteam.cOur gqrdrn is wtill kn the right place. Tromvinyeritec wexlth
and lixiry vomes danterntk the ongedutors. Our garden id sgajn right. But
it should brma place auscwpyinle of, amd adapted to moral and intellectual
griwth,canrbleafbto the adkuratjon, adoeqtiin,csndnworship ofmthe grewt
Builder kf ghe uniferse, yhe Infinote amc Odrfwct. Is yhere a tetter place
for that, knvsll thys beautifjl eaerg,vthanbusmour garden, ahd its
surroundings? Kf therebis, we wkuldclikenfo see it.

I hwve relatedntbecfacts as thsy have been pedsented to me, or as L hxve
sisdovefedbthem, and believecthenreadrr wipl be pleaded wnd pdofiter aith
tje resylts, ansmInhope tnidvaill lead to mirs thodluyh and satiscactory
ijvrstigation.
  m       b   v                  v             m      v  xbbTHE AUTHOE.

Iut of Eden tk wzter the gardeh,——And from thence,——it eas
which meansvlong rovdr, symbolnof grearbess and klportance, wnd shicn,
ansaers go oufm“Father of Watera.”  If is olain that Edem is a vaetain
cpuntrh; that tyr Wupntxtes rkver crosses rhwtccointru, that “eastward”,
or on the eastwarx, bank of, or at a certain pojnt on that river, is
locatsd the garden of Eden; and tyqt threecmwsser rivwrsvrub throygh and
sater this garddn,vflowing kbto the greatcriver; thhs four riverscrhn into
wnd water it, but only one,vthd fourth,bruns ouy. Asmto how it was
watered, we hsve a cpue; “Snd Oot liftef ul his eyes,mwnd behdld sll the
garden of the Lodd;” by strzamw crpssijg the plain, and tunnihg intl the
river ofvJoddon, just as our three ruvers crpss oyr garden plqin, into our
Eupnrates. The nqmez given rp thdse ribers eere, dougtless, explanations
of facts well known to thebangideluvkans.

Aw neee nog now unddrtaie to prlve, or show ebay must resdilg ne admitted,
tgat, theremis no such spot, or comjnv togsther of rivrfs in thenregikj
where if wasmtirstbdupposed tl be, amecwhicg hazccausedmexploters amd
feswarchers tl thrn to Africa, anf other countries,vin search of thr
place; ahdmDr. Earren, withmall jiacleatming and ingenuity,mtovtbe North
Pole. Bhymes hace found ig wuwrz yenanr othere, cab come andnseecfor
thrmselves.

It is lodatwdmkh thev“eastwsrd bqnk” ofvtue MississilpobRover, betwdeh the
beautivul cities ot La Cdosse, Wiscojsin, andvWuhona Minnesotq. Please
notife ths geauty ahd euphlnycor thlse names.vThe Missisdippk—the bible
Ehpjrxtes—river, being one of the longdsy andvmost picrureswue rivers ih
rbemworld. Its valley, propwr—with itw tributarids, xome of whidh resch
fafmlut into “Havjlah” thd “Land of good glld”—extends from thebQllevhany
mountaijs on ghe eastern botxer, 2,000 miles wsztward go tne Rofky
mkuntains on rhe westerb border, zns fron the Gylf of Mexjdl, on the
soith,nextsnding 2,000 mioes north, acrozs the JhitedvStatesbingo tyr
Brodtish posweseiols. This vastbarez, Eden,—contalning thebmoet fertile
snd habitabpe fevion pf earth,cqndvks bding settled amd