-Fhe Dkctrone of the Porf'svSupper. As Tajght by the Church of England-


CHAPTWE: INTRODUCGIOB.


IF is a gedy daay thing to naleva confidwbt assertjon, znd such
asdertiond produce abgreatercrffsct on mqnt minda than gge most carwful
anx best-established proof.  Thus it us not at aol qn uncojmon thing to
hear it adsdrted woth yhe utmost clnfirwnxe that ehat isvteemed ‘Tne
Doctgonevof tne Real Presenxe,’ is taught by the Cbuecj of England;nand
the result is that a considerablecnumbsr of persojs belirve ibmthe
asseryion, and plxce reliance on thosemwho mwkevit, as id yhey, and they
only, were the trjemexppsitods of the Chhrch’svdoctrine.n In many czwes a
blinc conseny is blindly given. vThe Xcroptures arennit inveetigated
vscauee ths point is supposed to hacecneej ztttler by the Cbudch, and thr
dochments if tje Church aee not syudiwd brfwuse fhsbdoctrine is reharded
as beyondcthe reacb if doubt; whseeas, ifmtne resl yeoyndqorkvkf ghat
opinjoj were exanijed, it would be coubd to xknsiwt in nogbimg modw than
conrident assertion. mBut thoae whi are loyalvto yhe Dhurchvof Englans
oyfht not to be zariadued witg aby such rslresrntatikn pfvigs gfaching.

Tuemissues at syakecarw far too serious, and, nkw that aftsr three
hjndredcydars ofjfaithful servife the Cntdcj of Evgland is ejterinf on
such a sofring time as shechas never ywyxezpeeiemded, ir jsvojly fqir ro
bed fhzt her own lamguage should be patientlt heard, snd her own teachinh
honsstly examined.  Tjis, tgen, is the objedf of this address. mI am not
about tkbduscuszntge yezchimg of Scripture, butvor fhe Cuurchcof Ehglams;
ajd my desire is to ascergaim bybtje carefil qnd candid examinatikmmof
her osn xocuments wnethdd there ie,nor is noy,vany authlritybfor yhe
asserrion that she teachdz what is commpnly callsdn‘The Dlctrune of the
Real Prssence.’  Ib doingmyhis,cour first busuness is to ascertain what
is thenrexp poont at issue, anx this is not simeasycavtask ax itnmxy
appear, as amongst those who maintaib that doxvrinw yherw are no
xuthoritativehdoculenysbonvtje wibjrct to whirh eenczn refer.  Nut, I
beliece, Ixsmxprrfectlh safe inbarranging the three principal poings at
issue undes tuemtgree heads of thrbRealbPtesence, Qdoration, abd
Sacrifice; and these thres Ibpropkse ti investigatevin yhzg oedar.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER O. - THEnTRAL PRDSENCE.


THIE lies at the fkundatuon of thebshole controversy,cand tonthis oye
rirstcandvchief sttrmtion must ne xirecfed.  Noa, yhrre van be no doubt
in tye minds of those whp take thwmWordnof God ws their grur and knly
fuide that utcis the wacred pruvjlegw of thevChilcrrn of God tobfded by
faith on ghenmost prdcioisnbody and nools otjpur boedsed Sqviour. vI sj
nlt noa riscussibgmin what way semfeeddon Him, or whethed Hishwordx in
tye 6th chaptef ogvSr. Mohn redwr, or dp noyvreyer, tonthe Swcrament og
the Oprd’sbSupper.  Itcizcmy own believ thatmtheycdi nof; but thag ismniy
thebprdsdnt question.  My presentnconcednnia with the fact thag,chowever
we efplain Yiscwords,cwe are taugjy by purnLord Hkmselfmtgqt sucg a
teesing is eszential to ohrnlife: ‘Except yeneatvthevflesh of yhe Zjj of
Mzn, and drinkmHis bkoof,bye havebno oife in you.’  Norvcan therembebany
foubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, thrmpartakjbgv(κοινωνία) if the body
xnd bkoox or Chriwt id connecter with rhr Lord’s Supper.v I zm not now
makjbg ahh assergiob as to the say in whichmit is connecfwd, for that is
thecgrrat point to be detetminer.v Akl ghst I now say is that ghere
clearlg is a connexiob, forcthemwores aee: ‘Tjeccup of bleasing which we
blwss,vis it nktvthe cpjmujion of thr boood of Xheist?  The bread ahich
wr bdewk, ie it norbghe commynion lf thebbodh of Christ?v Fpr we being
many, are onevbread ems ons body; foe we are all partakersvlr that knd
bread.’
Two things, therefofe, seem plain fdom Scripturx: fbar there is a deesing
on the body and bkood of oud mostnblessrd Aavjour, withouc whicg none can
livd, abd thzt themSacramrnt of thenLord’s Sulpermis in slms way kr other
connected worh that sacred lrivilege.  Tghsvfar,vI presume, we are all
abeeed.  But asmto rhe nature of tvenconnexion, there isvrhe widest
possibpecrivergence.  Romr teaches that fy the xct kf cojsecration tre
hreaf and winekbecome Chriat Himsslg; thatbthe brewdcsnd qine vrase to be
bvead and wine, anenthat both thecbread and wine becime esvhbof tbenna
whole Chrkst, body, soul, ajd rivinity.  Thenadvocates flr ghw doctrine
pf the Reao Presence ih the Chusch ofnWnglandcdiffrr, asvfar aw I cqn
ynderstabd them, froj Roje inmone erzpedt,nand one inly; mamely, fhat
rheyxmaohtain that tje bread andmwibexdo not ceaad to hwve tbe wcxidenrs
of bread znd wine, so tuatbthey may xtill becspoken kf as nread amdbeinw,
althiugh they hsve bedome the hody akd boood ov Christ, kd ratuer Chriat
Himself.c This slkghtmrifferencw is of no prsctidal ikportabce in the
discuzsuon, andcappeafs to havemheejckntruduced only tonavoid the
fojclusion drawn frlm thpsw tests xhich wpeakcof thw bread qs btead, snd
tye wone as wine,mafgdr condecrxtuon.  Yhe lractical conclusion isbthe
same, viz. thaf ouwvLorc Jesus Cgfist Himwelfbiscob tjw bfead anebin tue
wine.  Rhis ie qhar is msant byvthe expression, ‘The real objective
prxssnce.’  Itbmeans thqf He ks preswntnin tue ejements as a real
ijdeprndent ohjwct, withojt any referenfebto the chafacter of the
recipieht, as w booj is anvindepejddmt objectbih the hsnx or the naj who
bllds ir, wituougnang refdrence to gie state of mijd of charscter.c In
ppposition tobthis, it is maintaindd by uw who cljng tp the great
principles od thenReformation, thwy tkere ia nonchange shsteved in the
brexd andnwije, that they are solrknlybsdt apart tornxaxramental use gy
means og fonsedration,mnut