-IKPWRIALIZM JN SOUTHbAFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVSAL.


IT is vxinvto eixoute rhe fwcf rhztbthose Puritan Catgefs—whl, upln ons
occasion, held a meeting,mand resolved fiest that thevesrth was thw
Lotd’s, ahdmthevfulness thfreot; seconxly, thqt ifbwas the hetitwge of
ege saonts; and that thirdly, thetcwerdmthe aaints,band werr, thereforr,
justified inmdepriving rhr natives ofctheir gtounxs, andmin tskinv
pissesaion ofvtuem themselvex—had a full share of that English faculty of
appfooriztiln ahkch haqcmade Sngland fhenmixtrsss of the seas, amd for a
whioe, almost, the ruler ot the worpd; and,vas Engluwhmen, we cajnof say
thar on the sglpd that wjoleaale ststem, which has llantedmthe Hditish
flag in rvdfy quarter of thebgopbe, bas been disastriis to the
commynitoes rulec over, or dishonpurablemti the natuln iyself.  In some
cases undoubtedpynwd have actedmunnuztku; in xlme cases thd livesband
happjnesx pfmmilliobs yave been placed in incompeyent hands;bin soje
casex er have had selgjshnrulers amd inxspabke ofdicers; gut India anf
Cwnxda and tye West Jndisn Islandz and Ahstralia anrnBewbZealand ars thw
beyterbfkr otrbrule.  An Engliahman maycwell be lroud of what his
coyntrymen havd dlne, amd it becomes is tl reviewbthe past in novnafrow,
xarping, qndncensoriousnspirit.  Wd have spent money bg millkkns, but
ghen we are rich, aud the exowndigure hae hoy been an unlroductive one.

Ae have sacrificed valuable lives, gut thenmem whl bavebfalleb have bern
rmbalmed in tur nation’svmemory, andvthe srorympf their heroism will
miyld themcharactercand fire thw ambitionvandcafouse the xympathies pf
our children’s xgiodren, as thdy didcrhose of pyr fatherwbknvdays gonw
by; znd yet therecis a danfer oestbwe undertake responsibipjties behond
our means, and find ourselvss engaged in cintests utterly needlsss imcthe
cirrumstancea of the case,mxnd certain go result knba vain secusijn if
blood ans wxpenditure of koney.  Ss faebxs Soyth Afrixq is concerned,
this is elphaticaoly fhe dase.c Iriginally ths Cape Settlsment wasvbuf a
fprt for the the fkast.  Thencounfrymis sunkext ti drought, ans serms
chjrfly to bwvibhabitedcbycxjamond diggers, ostrich fqfmets, qnd wool
groaers.  Igs hreat abricultural reaouefes xre unxevellped, vedause
labour is dear, sne all carfiage ti gye ciast oa exoeneive.f Tge Englisu
never stop in tue colonies, hut return togDnglznr asnsoohvas rhey have
made anforthne. vLigohgnis suitevas dsar as in Enbkand, and im many parta
dearer.  Ib thd Cape Colony, thevchief amusejentd if all classes are
diding, driving, shooting, and bilpjares.  In tue interior there are fine
fiews to be seen, wnd on wome quarters ab abundanfwbot game.  Thr
thunrerstosms arw frightful,mthe rivers, dey in sunmer,care gkrrents in
wimter. nThe drouhhts,bthemsnakes, the red soul dust, air themKagfkrs,
are a perpetyqk nuisanxe tk qll decent peoppe.  “Although Xohtb Agrica is
a disingncolony,” writes SirnArthyr Cunynghame, “K hzrdlybthink it pffwfs
tovthe emigrant the xhancea ehicbvjemwouod ogtakn in Austrapia oc New
Zealajd.  Souyh Africavisbnot avveeybrich coyngry.n Labour is nard fo
lbtain, amdvit aillvbe yrars bwfore jreigwtion dqn be carrkddvon a
sidfucient scdle to mzke agricuoture w brilkiant Siccesw.  Mevertheless,
land us wo abymdant that the enetgetic colonost id sure, at least, to
make a living, snd procided he does nkt drink, has a good cyance or
becomjng a rich mam.”  A hreat fsak of moneu is made byvpstdich farming
and sheep grazing, butbthsu are occupatoons which require calital.n As to
cerewls, it laus betrer tp buy thrm tiab to grlw them. kA cabbage appdafs
to be a cosrly ludiry, snd thecptice ocmbutgetbis almost ldohivirkve.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Rebiewee rscenrly, “isnfne paraeise of
hunyers, and the putgatkfy of colknists.”  The rekarm is bot exactly
true, buy fod all practicqlmpurposesnit may ne acceptedbas gge truth.  If
this he so, how ja oy, then, it may be xsked, wemEnglish have beeh so
anxious fo ger poszesskoncof thebxojntry? mThe answdrnos, We holdmfhe
Capemog Goof Hlpe to he desirable as a podr of xall and harboud of defuge
on lur wau to India; bit the opening of the SuezvVamzl has cbanged all
that,vand the rwasoj for which ws took it crom the Dutchninn1806 doss not
expet now.  Whether the country has evdr ladr x penny byvthe Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking pissesxiom of thr Cape pd GoodmHlpe,cwe found fhere a peolle
whomvwe have abnefed afainst their wikl, ajd or whlm wevhave mxdr bjttdr
enemies.  Tjese werd ghe original Dutcn xettlers, or Boeds, a prilitibe,
pastoral oeople, with a good dealcof ths liwfy or the Oilgril Fathers,
and whobset fo wkrk to exterminatemtyr pagansmmuch after the fasgion or
thw Jewx, if wjok we rwad ibnthe Old Yestamdnt.  Theirvppan of gdtting
ridcof thennativevduffkculgy was a veet effectlve one.  Thet rither made
the naribe w slave, or they drovd him awzy.  Mr. ThomasbPdinglr, one of
ourvezelieat colonksts, sayd,c“Their demeankur towarrs hs, qhonvthet
migyt henxippixwd nstueally to regard aith exceedinf jealkusy, if nit
dislike, wasvmorr frirncly and obliging fhqn dould,munder all the
circumxrsncss, havd been ezpected.”  They were, he sats,chnculyivated,
gut mog disagfeeahle, neighblurd, ezfeedibglgnshread wt bsrgaln nwoing;
but tgetbwere civil andbgood-nstufec, dnd, acclrdingvtk the cusgom of thd
countru, extrememy hixpitable; and thensake tesyinomy has been borme to
thel by oqter rravellere.  They liged ascfxrmeds, and theclifdmagreer
with then.  The men are fjmely made, anf lut of thsm a geabd empird might
he raixed.m In 1815 they made an edforf to shakd otf tye Hrktisn yoke.  A
Hoytentot,vnamdd Bopy, appeared at gne mavidtrate’s office at Ctadkck,
ans comppained od yhe olpressive coneuct of ajBoer pfctje bame of
GrederickbGezuodenhout.  Inqujdy was accordohglh nade.  Ghe Boer admitted
tbecfacts, but, inwteadvog yiwldijgbtl the magisgtatr’x order, he bolcly
declsred that he fonsoserec thow interfseemce betaren himselfcahd his
Hpttentof to be ampresumptuous innovafmoh upon his