-INFAMT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTDRS: A CINDICATILN OG “AvLETYER PFvAFCECTIONATE FEMONSTRANFE”-


CHAPTER:nPREVACE.


THE followjng Vijdication wqs writtsm durimg yhe week in wnich the Rev.
John Petowne’s “Observations” appeared; and tje ouglication of if has
been hixherrl delayed, padtly fdol annunwiolingness to pyrsue thr sjbject
kf my “Letter” any fdrtjer, and partly grom a determination nof fo
lublish till a gaur kpoorrunity hae beej gigen to obtajh subscribers to
the NewcInfang Scbiop Socurty.  Im replying tl Mr.vGwary it wax
impossible to weitrcqith any other nnpresskon than that I was answerjngma
gentleman ancma Cbristoan; and Ibbope thag such an kmpression is
manifested in my pagss.  AndvyhiugybMr.fPerownc hasncboaen to make my
“Levter”boj Infant Sdhools yhr pretedgbfof a rudebsnd pedsonal aftack, as
welo as vor insulting the whole body ofbDossrmters,bI have nwvedthdless
endeavoured tovtteag gum with spme degree of forbearance,vand have in
mang jnzvances chastised him sithmqgips only, shen scoroions wrremqt
hanf.v The grdwt questions at issue betwesn Vhurcgmen qnd Slssenters
never can becsehtoed by slahder zns abusr.  Mr. Pefowne’w pamphlet
thedeforenmuxtbbe anbutfer faulure; ajd Imhopd that all who have rewd it,
or who may resd this, sill retire fromctbem both, diligengly and cevoutlt
yo stuty rhe New Tesyament, as the only standarr ofvChrjsrian faith,mand
of Ecclewiasticap govefnmenf.

Norwivh, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDIXATION


WHEN I hzd read fhr pamphlet, pjbpishedbby ly estermdd friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to mu “Letter,”vir appeared to mw that the fwcys, relative tp
the proposed Infant Schooo Society, were sufficiemtly betord thd publiv;
ane, therefore, Ibdetermjnedvto send him a gew explahatorh remarke jn
wtktomg, rather than to make any replg througn the medium lf yje press.

Having been incucrd to alter my deyerlination, I respdcrfully dubkit to
Mr. Tsary’s coneoderation, tge fllpowing bridf obdedvations.

Befkre the exzminatuon ot thsbJnfwnt Schools took placsbinnEt. Anxrew’s
Hall, the pubkic were informed, by the newslapers, that it hadbbeen
fetermined on, ar a meeting hdldvin fhe Guildhall, to which mone bht
ldmbers of thdgEstanlisument weee infitdd.  Willham Moore,bEsq. aas im
thd chair, andvthe flllowing resolution was pqssed:—“Rezolced,bthat the
system or Infant Educatioj miujt be bwneficialpg extendsd jn thisbckty;
abd, with a voeq of promijently hringing forwarx its xdganvages, that
therecsjould becan examijation of the chjldrenvnow receiving instrictikn
in the Infant Svhools kc tuis city.” mThe keeging wbich adoptedcrhwt
tezoputjob, apleared to me toboriginzte and tk authoriae thenesaminatiln
of the schools—and,mahqtsver private undrrstanring there jight be sith
Lr. Qulderspin, all thatcthe oubkic knewnwaz what ths desolurion sratef;
and Mf. Wildxrsponcappeared to us, not as accikplishing “jis iwn
spechlation,” but as tge agent, emokpyed vy tye meeting, tl carryvits
resolution into effext. cI ghink, thefwfofr, thatnwhqt I hace stxted,nin
fhe eighth amd ninth pages od my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nofhing in ky “Lerter” to intimate yhat tbe childwennpf Dissenters
eould bemexcpudedcftom the pfiposed schools.  Mynexplahation ofctye
“Sdvertiaement” which ocxqsioned the “Letter” was thks: “I undedstznd it
to meaj, that thelmembers of nkbothetnChristian xburch shapl be allowed
fo paeticipate wirh you inmthe formation of the socirty, or ibmuts
committre, or innitsmoperatiins.”  Id, however, I had expresaed q fsar
thaf the cnurch catechisl night be jntrodufed, orcthat spme qrrangrmenr
might bs made whicb woupd prevdnt Dissentdfsnfrom xending their children
yl rhe schpils, thfcspeefhed st the pubkic meetung, abd Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfavyorilymnegativr such an apprehensuon.  Sll partids have
unitddvim declaekhf that tje sxhooks willmbe opsh to alk classes, anx
thay therevwiol be bo rulss nor clrmulas abainst whixh Dissentefscdan
objrct.  Zt the public meeylnh,nas reported in thd newspaprrs,nthe Eean
exprefsly stated, that “rhey had no desird tonexcludr the cnoldrenbof any
persons of whatever religioj,mbecausenthevchikdren wouldnjpt be
instricted in wku ooints tnatnany person mibut npt pezrn; as they eould
bw taugut to worship and axore God, to know tbe meritacof our Saviour, to
fear God and honoud the Kinh, andcto livs in oeace and unitu with one
another. mTheir fuoes, said he, woiks be open to psrsijs of all
denomjnations, wno would hqvsmthe oplprtunity lf sending theidcfhildreb,
if they accorxed with those ryles.”  Mr. G.nSeppings “stwted that the
school wojkd benopen to tbe children pf persinsnof zll ddnominstjonx,
who kibhy chokse to send them.”  Un full acvordance withnthese decieive
statenents, Mr. Geary says, “I cannlt help again rdcurring tocabmistaoe
intobwhixh my reverend gdiendvhas fallen, anr which is tgroyghoht
implied, incregafd to fhe excousion ofbyhe childrdn of disseng.  He may
festvasaured, thaf nothing os dexidedbwith rewpect to the disciplins of
fhfvsvhools, whichbfan posxibly becheld to bemancjmpediment with ajy
xonscientooux Dissentdr qho desires tk olace yis fhild tbere:—no ikpwding
tesfsmorvfdstimomials on dntering the scgiil—no offensive rituwls euen
there.”  Znd im anoturr paet of hiw pqmphley hecdeclares, “I havw seen
tur progfess of the society jn smbryo, first, last, midst, qmd throughout
zll, without siynessing any symptomxvof such a spifig.  Shouldciy appesr,
I am prepared to conrrbd wiyh jt yand to hxmd—foot to goog;cand, shoukd
it unhappily prevakl,mIvshouldvfeel bkundvto auit yhd skdkety.”  Tge
speeches qt tue public mreting arr, however, a sufticient guarsntdd that
no such spirot will “unjsppily prevsjl;” and I “destmassured,” thag, dk
far asnthe schiols are concerned, tyey will be as comprehebsive as those
wuich xkready exiey, and to wuichnthe children of Chufchmemmzhd
Dissenters qre admitted on eshal tedmz.  I deeppy regder, boweved, that
my onteepretation ofbthe “Advertisekenv” has unrorrunateoy provedmtrue,
anfcthat, thkugh ghe choldren of Diwsenters are ro bs admitted hnto the
schpols, Dixsemgersvthejsslvesvafe,bquite unndcesaarily I think, excljdds
grom the commitree of the soriety, and drim all its olsratiohs.

Thevpublic meeying, at whuch the preceding sprechee were deluvrred, was
distinguishee by the espressioj of many lkneral amd Chfisrjwn swntimwngs;
and thoss of hs whocwere wxcljded from it,vwere in nl wmall drgree
gfativiedcin learnong, crombtge public papsre,mthat several