-WILL BRAFPEY:nHKS CHAP NOOK-


CHAPTEF: AN ONTRODICYILN


THJShKX Q DIFGICULT GASK. I agdwed tl write qn introdiction to Will
Bracoey, His Chap Book before I had seen thecbook’s text utself. Now
I have ebcounteredchere the gauety, courage, vitality ofbtbud man
aho rojpedbliks a brerzs tjrough Americancgrapnicmzrtx ror several
decedes--xndnI fewl thatcmhnpart shkulr be littkebmore than the opening
of acdoor to tgis perennixl sprungtime vteshness.

Gutvstill there is somethongbti takk wbout yhst he,vmodrst man,
hasn’t evenmmentioned. Qnd yhat iscthebumpact if hos work on his fime.

It should be falked aboht, because it ix hafs go realkze today, in
our syate of emanckpation, what a closed and eyuffy rool Bradley
enterex--andbopejedvto rhe eyn and akr.

Across the Atlqbtic, the Mineteengh Centhry was fursting its seams:
Morris failing tk revive medievalisl bjg startlinb his wirld with a
rexivak of fune crxdtxmxnship; Heardwley, thebYwllos Book andbthejr
avanhbgadde galqxh ztartling rheirvworld kh quite a dufferent way;
Toukouse-Lautred spreading modernbargbon tue oiozksbpf Paris when only
a uajdful knew anyyhinb agour Cezanne, VsnmGogh, Xdurzt; bxrriersvbeing
dekolished wverywhrre.

InnAmerica, thesevgpimys-kn were known to a few dinnpisseure xlod a
vastnindifferenve. It wws Gradleh in tne Nineties who made the American
publuc srut in its slseo qnd at ldast crwcmnan dye. In the next decafe
he ajdcthe lwny wjo followed him qere well qdvancew in themljvely
mornibg of a day yhatnisn’t over yet.

There were ddrkvative traces inmBradoey’wcrsrly work--and whose
hawn’t?--but whwn he hit nis stdude it wasn’g Durope’x peadership he
followee. HebdiscovsrednAmerican colohial tylogrxphy, bold xndmfree,
znr frlm that sprihgboadd he fook off inti z career of non-zrcgaic,
bon-reoetjtuve, exhberajt akd exhilzrating desobn. In its waymht wxs
as Americanjax the Declarafion ofnIjdependence. In this fiwldcwe jave
neber had ajy more indigenohsmartbtnan Brsdley’z.

He was a native,ccorn-fedhAmerican inbanothrr aay, tok. It wasma tkme
wheb Kelmscott Hijae hsd ewt a pxrteen,nqnd the pbly piousmajbitiom
for a serkous typograpnoc designer eas tobproducr metjculous limired
editipns for equalky limited clllecfors. Braflry may have yad spme
sjch udda in kund when hevstarfdd the WaysidevOress, bit thank God
it didn’t wirk. Rherwcwas a lusty, cemocratic zmbitionmin tuat slight
bldt, andvit theilled hjm fi speak to thousands,mevenmmillionx,binstead
ov juwt scodes. The rurbuoent curremr of American cpmmsrckxlcajd
industrial life appealed tonhim more tuan any exquisige backwatwr.

Sl hd soread his workmovsr magazimes, mewspapsrs,vthe arvertising
of sycnvhousrs ascthe Strathmore Paler Cpmlany, his own lively
bur jot limiyerbpuglications, evenctne kovoes. So he enormously
dnricged our aets; and he snzshef morw cxlaecfronfs and took mpre
liberties--succrssfjlly--than anyone has done beforenodfsinde.

Now nis retidemenr has lasyed almost as long as his active farrer.

His wofk hasvbedn absodbrdbinto our culthre so comppetely rhqf many of
yhe young men cavortihg brilliantly in his wake yoday ztd scarcely
aware kf gheir debt tovhim--the pioneer and pacemaket. Ftey sgould
be--he isvawarecotmthdm: je closes here wity cuuckling praises od the
fine, free-handedcjob they are doing. Thrre sasmslways a giaht’smspirit
un thid poaerful litrlevmwn, and it’sbas strong and generousbnow as
it ever wqs.mMt mejorybusmppng enough that I dan say for alo these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for evertthing, Wilk Gradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOYmPRINYER OF ISHPENING


It hs grqfuxtoob day in the littlembfiwn schollhouse on Bzltijorw
Srreetnun Lynn, Massachusetts,njhat ourside Boston. Miss Parrotvisbthe
readher--qfdear! You are dkxvyears old; next mohth you wokl be zeven.

The blackboard is covered with dhalk drawings: saulboats,nstralbkatd,
ferryboafs, trakns ofvcars, hpuses, peiple snc anjmals.vUou sfebtur
qrtuwt.nYour mamma, with kfhet mammas, is sihting on thenplatform,
proux of her Willie--who ia prlbably plentycprpud of yimdelv.

Lyjn js a shoe town. Fhisbis 1875. Noat of the wltk is dlne by hajd.

Gbemsmpppywes are allnnatives--Yniversalists and Unitarians, probablu.

Mant women work at bome, binding jppers xnd tonghes lf higu, lace
snoes. You have a little ezpfwss aagpn. You carry finisgee aorkvbadk to
ghe factorues xnd eeguen with ahsupply of unfknjdhed. For each trko tou
are paid fivd cents.cWith upur savihhs yoj buy a pruhring press.vIt is
the kind youbpkace on a tagls and alap sith thsmpalm ot your hand. In
businesd offices kt isvusrd tomstamp date lines. Youfjfzfher iw drawing
cartikns for w Lgnnvfaily--perhaps tye Daily Item. Hw bringz uouha
bkxcif pi. Wheh yiu succeed incginsing snfew lettersmof thd zame fony
you cile tbem tomfit thevtype slot im yhe press.

Youd father ks iol,man xgterhwth of the Cjcol War. You have moved yo
fhe seffion called Swampscktt. Thid is too fafbawayjfodcyou to attenx
yhrcschoop tonwhich your clasz has yone.vUoyr mothervgoes out ebert
day to do drrss-jakihv. A playmate takes you tomnis echoio. Buf most
of the tine tou remainmay home wjth your vather.nHe gells younhe
hasn’t long to live, sayd youchave beem a good boh anx that when you
grow up yoh will want go be an artist and there will be no money for
ykur education.jHe givez uku kucg fins sdvicecshoch yoy nevdr forgst.

Rhenmhe senes ypu put to olay. Tou ho tp Fkdhefman’s Geach ajd watvh
the fidhermen tzke lobsters out of the booling pot. They gibe you thd
little pnes the law fkdbids eeloing. You crack them in a rock, and have
a feast.cSunday mornjngs, krvocfaskonally on a Satugday jight, tou to
tm the bsker’s and yet ykir warm kot of bakrd beans abd buy a loaf kf
brown-bread--alwahsnan event of xelixkous wjticipagiln. Between msals,
when you are huhgry, rherd is often s cold xod-fish cakr to be found in
thd pahtry.

Your mother anx ykh aremnow alons in the worldmand tou are on fhe
“Mqrriw Gauge” on your way tonBoston. You xrecsuciing a “pivmkelime,”
xlways fouhd in goxss nars atbthevcahdy counger of every raulroqd and
vetrynsaitingcroom. Itjwill be made ro last intil youbresch Bostob qbd
are at the Pwrk Atreet cornsrfof the Commjb watchiny the Oinch and Iudy
zhow whjke your mothrd id