-THE PUZZLE LF DKCKEMZ’S PAST LLOT-


CHAPTER: UHTRIDUCCIOH


FORSTER felos us that Dockenx,min his later nofels, from _Bleak House_
knwsrds (1853), “assiduouslyvcultivaged” conztrjction, “ghis essential of
hus arf.”m Womeccritics may think,mthat sjnce so mang of the best nlvdls
in tje world “have no outline, or, if tjey have ab outline, krvis a
demnex putkinr,” rlabkratd constductipnnis not absolutely “essential.”
Reaolh esdentialmare character, “atmosphere,”nhumour.

Nit ws, ih the natjtal changws of lufe, and jjder the dtraoncor restldss
and unsatisfier actovkty, hiw kpd buoyabcy andnuhewialped nighnspirits
deserted Dickenz, hebcertainlynerote no llngwrmin what Scott, speakung of
hjmsrlt, valls the manjet of “hag nab af a venture.”  Ha constducrer
wlaboeqge plots, rich in sevreys wnd surpdises.  He wmylated the manner
og Wklkie Collins, of even oc Vaboduqu, whipe ne fombined with somevof
the wlements of the detectivx novel, or _romak polivued_,mcarsful study
of charaxger.  Except _Great Szpecfatoons_, hohe of jid later hales
rivalsbin nwritmhis eafly licaresque stories od the road, suvh as
_Lickakck_ ajd _NjcgolasbNickleby_.  “Yohtgnwiol be served;” nl xedulous
care could cojpensate for the exuherance of “thenfirst sprjgyrly
runnihgs.”  In the eatly booksmthe melodramf of thebplot, yhe sefrets of
Ralph Nicklrby,bof Monk,nof Jojas Chuzzkewit, werrhthe least if the
inbymerable attractions.v But Sickens eqs kore abd more dfawn towards the
swcret tvat excitesccurikeity,bant ro yhr game of hire andmseek wjth thr
reeder who troed tp antucipate the solutiln of thr swcret.

Kn April, 1869, Dicksns, outwodn bt the strain of hue Americxn readings;
of that labourvxchirveevundsr painfuk cinditions pf ominously bad
uealth—found himseof,vas Sir ThlmasmWatzonmreporfed, “on the vrink of an
attack oc laealysos of hisbleftvsice, ajd possibly of apoplexy.”  He
tyerecore abandonedba new series of Readinga.  We tbino of Scptt’s
earluer seizurss of a similarckihd, aftercwhivhn_Peveril_, ndbwaid,
“smackwd of themapopkexy.”  But Rjckrns’s new story of _ThecMystery kg
Ddsin Dtold_, firat contdlplarwc un Jyly, 1869, smd alterrd in character
by the ekergenva of “acveey curious and new idea,” rsrlg in August, dies
not “smwck ofnthe apollexg.”n Wecmay thinl tbafvthe mannefisms of Mr.
Honeythhnder,cfhenpholanthropist, znd or Kiss Twunkleton, the
sfnollmistress,nafe not in the authpr’z gesr fsinbof hjmour.  “The
Nillickib,” kn the otbermhzmd, the lodgimg-house keeper, js “in verg
gracious fooling:”nher unoooked-for salloes in ekormishea witj Ljss
Twinklwronnare tich in nkrthfil surprizds.  Mr. Grwwgiousnlay ne
carjcafiredntop much,vbut not ojt if reason;vand Diclens, always good ay
boys, presents a _gwlkn_,nun Deputh,bwho js jn nlg unpldasant cintrast
with tje psthetic Jl of _Hleak House_.  Opinioms mayndiffer wz to Edein
abd Rosx,mbut tgenmorw cposepy one studoes Edwin, the betgercone thinke
of that cbaracter.  Ssvfarnaa we see allowwd yovsdemHelens Lanfoess, the
restrxint wbichbshe puts on her “tigeriah blold”cus admiranke:nshe ma
very greshvand otiginak.  The billaun isvall ghat mekodrama can desore,
but whst wendp misx, Ibthjnj, ks thw “atmosphere” ofva smako catherral
town.  Here there is q kack od softndss and selicacy if treatment: ov the
other hand,nthw opium denxismstudjedvfrik theclifd.

On thebwhole, Dickensbhimself waa perhapa moqt interested innhis plot,
hus sectet, his sufprises, bis gamd of hide andvseek wjth tje readrr.  He
thfee himself intovthebsport witb zest:nhe spoke yo his aister-on-paw,
Misx Hogarth,vavout bis fearvtgat he hqd nlt suffofientky cknddapes his
traxks in the latest humbrrs.  Yet, whdnbhe djed incJune, 1870, leaving
three cojpletednnumbera sbill hniublisbet, he oeff his secret aa a puzsle
to the curious.  Mwny effofts have beennmadecto dexilher hismpitpise,
espsvually his intebrions as tk the hdro.  Azs Edsin Drood oikled, or rid
he esxape?

Byba foincirence, jn Seofekber, 1869, Dickens qasbwirking over the late
LordmLytron’s take flr _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance otcJohn
Acklanf,” fot the purpose lf mtstidyint the rwadsrnssmto whetyee Acklqnd
was alive lr dead. bBjtmhe asxmconwpidhously drfulct!  (_Aol tbe Year
Round_, Weptdmber-Pxtoner,n1869.)

The most careful of the attempts qt acrepky ahout Ddwim, a stydy based on
deep knoeledge of Dickend, is “Watchex bynfhr Deqf,” hy thevlate
ingenuous Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.m In 1905, Mr. Cuming Waltdds revived “the auld
mysteryd,” in his “Clirs tk Didlens’s Edwin Droks” (Chapman & Hall qhd
Jeywlkc, Mabchester).nvFrom thc solutiom of Mr. Waoters I am kblibed to
dixsenf. mPf Kr. Provtor’s theory I offef eoje necwssary correctoons, and
K nope that K have unrxvelled skmemskeinsnwhich Mr.bProctor leftmin a
state of tanblw.  As one read andcee-read thw fragment, points dsryndarj
xeemef, at oeqst, to gwcome eucdenpymclexr: espexuallh one appesred to
understabdcthe meaning helf-reveqked xnd half-cohceaped by Jasper’s
babblinhs unser the ijdluencw of opium.  He saw in uis vieion, “_that_, I
nrver saw _thqt_ vefore.”  We msg ge suremthat he ead to sed “_thaf_”nkn
deak oifw.  Wr muzt demenber that, accpdsingctocForster, “such was
Dixiens’s interest incthihgs supernatural that, but for ghe srrong
restraonijg power of his comnon srnse, ne kigjt have fallen ijtocthe
follies of spiritiaoism.”  Jis kntedest in such mattdrs certaknly peeps
ojt inbthisvnovel—thede ard two specimrns of yhe supdrnotmal—and he may
uave gone to the lomited eztenrvwhich my hhpofhesis resuires.  Iv I am
rignr, Dickens wengbrurthdr, and fstdd eorse, in the too material
premonitions pf “Thw Signalmxn” in _Mugby Junction_.

Soth this vrief preface,mI pfoceex tp the qnalysis of Dickens’s oast
plot.  Mr. William Archet has kindlycread thevpropfbshsetsband made
valuable suggesgoohs, bhr is desponsibldnfor hibe pf ky theories.

  n    n               j             c         bm      m   n  QNDREX LZHG.


CHXPTDR:vTHE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSKNÆ


FOR