<think>
Alright, let me start by carefully reading the given story to understand its content and structure. The story is a lengthy and detailed account of someone's claim that a specific region in the American Midwest is the Garden of Eden, based on biblical descriptions. The author describes the geography, compares it to biblical accounts, and argues for its uniqueness and significance.

Now I'll evaluate the story on two dimensions: fluency and coherence.

**Fluency Evaluation:**

Fluency refers to the overall clarity and readability of the text. I'll look at sentence construction, grammar, punctuation, and word choice.

Issues I notice in fluency:

1. [GRAMMAR] There are numerous grammatical errors throughout the text. For example: "In gave the antldiluvians a description" (should be "He gave the antediluvians a description") and "give a description of the location—and it not being on that continent" (should be "gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent").
   
2. [GRAMMAR] Subject-verb agreement errors: "no one know where it was" (should be "no one knew where it was").

3. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "the finger of time has am plainly pointing" (should be "the finger of time has almost plainly pointing").

4. [GRAMMAR] Run-on sentences and missing punctuation: "When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must place him somewhere. In gave the antldiluvians a description of the creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts, and give a description of the location—and it not being on that continent, he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one know where it was; nor was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause of no little speculation."

5. [LEXICON] Word choice and redundancy: "the finger of time has am plainly pointing" (awkward phrasing). Also, there's excessive repetition of phrases like "Come and see!" and "Garden of Eden."

6. [SYNTAX] Awkward sentence structure: "But by degrees it has been opened to the minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere on the American Continent; and the finger of time has am plainly pointing to what is known as the 'North West,' as the place."

7. [GRAMMAR] Tense inconsistencies: "I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with the results, and I hope this would lead to more thorough and satisfactory investigation." (should be "I hope this will lead" not "would").

8. [GRAMMAR] Missing commas and other punctuation: "From inherited wealth and luxury comes danger to the inheritors." (should be "From inherited wealth and luxury comes danger to the inheritors.")

9. [GRAMMAR] Incorrect verb forms: "should was sought" (should be "should be sought").

10. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles: "the hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful scenery, and counting the rivers" (should be "the hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admiring its most wonderful scenery, and counting the rivers").

11. [LEXICON] Redundancy: "most beautiful town site, Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original proprietors" (repetitive phrasing).

12. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles: "the names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations of facts well known to the antideluvians."

13. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admit, that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North Pole."

14. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "It is located on the 'eastward bank' of the Mississippi River, between the beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota."

15. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable, easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening."

16. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes the islands and 'river bottoms'—cut up by water courses and sloughs."

17. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, made a valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest bluffs on the Mississippi."

18. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the 'eastward bank,' nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site, Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the 'nicest,' 'most beautiful,' 'splendid,' town site on the Mississippi river, they were bound to get rich at once, 'but not knowing their day,' and how to build up a town like, the fabled dog, 'they grabbed for the shadow and lost the reality;' 'Their language was confounded and their work delayed.'"

19. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes, scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the 'Face of a King,' some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top."

20. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "The top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime kilns."

21. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "Now, please, place yourself with me on the 'Central Outer Dome' 'Heald’s quarry,' facing toward the eastward, and you had, before, below, and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world."

22. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "Not like the Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden."

23. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this garden. Turn, now and faced the south-west. There, before and below you flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or its own flowing waters."

24. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "See its 'Broad channels,' queer and picturesque islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse, running in a southeasterly and southern direction, made a beautiful curve, leaving the main garden valley on the 'Eastward' bank, in the form of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end, and 10 miles through the center."

25. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "This vast valley plain is our Garden of Eden. Now, Looked! as thousands before you have done in wonder and surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a garden without a 'Serpent.'"

26. [GRAMMAR] Missing articles and prepositions: "And this hung garden has been notable and notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down

----------------------------
finish_reason: length