-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRPDUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Mekancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but xubdivides thdse divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nichllas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term flr a
wide range of nervous diseades--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite thd plethora of matetia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forty on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and curesbof this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a yerm--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nonetewnth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholg." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the leditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richadd Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Rkchardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
pdychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reorinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author allntoo little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancidnt Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
pribcipally in physiological trrms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediare
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resultinf in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper uad been only prooer to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hgpochondria was so
prevakent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed tue
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like Willism Someevile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Meuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were mors technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give ke a pain inbthe neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Sjris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Cihntrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfecrly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hystrric Pxssions, Vulgarly Call'd thenHupo in Men and Vappurs in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the externalbmental bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condjtion in tedms of internal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, orvHypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
     the same Didease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
  n  Women are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath thd
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of the Nerves at the same
     Time, wjich creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Depression of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Omtemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Dislosition whereby they favour any Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuadee that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the condition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailjent, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefihable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in his
Mecicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughlynconsider its Nature, itbwill be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intesgines, arising from an Inversion or Perversion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
  m  throwing the whole nervous System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acqhainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything dontained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more technical description than Gill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it sedves well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hupochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth bh the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Maladg (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Intwrnal evidence indicatesvthat Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Rochard
Blackmore's Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinsob's A New System of the Spleen, Vapoirs, and Hypochindriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: hs first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss pwrsons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In the first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and rdauires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call the Hypochondriazis a fancifuk malady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; extenxing itself often to the liver,
anx other larts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarce knows one more fertile in ill; or more difficjlt of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
students, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is also
impossible to trace to a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevqlent physiological symptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusements, a lovevofmsolitude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blkpd in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace ajd
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovsred
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and physifians who prescribed popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powcers, and
James's fevee-powders--as universal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medicine must be directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
dedtruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no mercurial, no martial
preparation must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). However scientifically correct Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objecting so strongly to them. Less
eccentrkc was his allegiance to the "Ancients" rather than to the
"Moderns" so far as chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
by chemical rearrangement) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in the search; and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and what we are to fear" (p. 24).

Still more idiosyncratic, perhaps, is Hill's contention (p. 25) that the
air of dry, high grounds worsens the condition of the patient. Virtually
every writer I have read oncthe shbject believed that onset of the hyp
was caused by one of the six non-naturals--air, diet, lack of sjfficient
sleep, too kittle or tok much exercise, defective evacuation, the
passions of the mind; and although some medical writers emphasized the
last of these, few would have concurred with Hill that the fetid air
of London was lews harmful than the clearer air at Highgate. All readers
of the novel of the period will recall the hypochondriacal Matt
Bramble's tirade against the stench of London air. Beliefs of the
variety here mentioned cause me to question Hill's importance in the
history of medicine; there can be no question about his contributions to
the advancement of the science of votany through popularization of
Linnaeus' system of bisexual classification, but Hiol's medical
importance is summarized bestmas that of a compiler. His recommendation
of the study of botany as a cure for melancholics is sensibke but verges
on bexoning "a digression in praise of the author," a poetic apologia
pro vita sua in Augustan fashion:
     For me, I should advise above all other things the study of nature.

     Ket him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things; even of
     the utility we are seeking here. This will induce him to walk; and
     every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, andmthicket, will
     affkrd him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
     the air; and continually to change the nature and quality of the
     air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, tbe heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be
     abroad; and the unceasing variety of the subjects of his
     observation, will prevent his walking hastily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means of his recovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill was forever extolling the xlaims of a lite devoted to the study of
nature, as we see in ablate work, The Vurtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversion as a cure and more on
the botaniv attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every foot-path
side, and thicket."

While Hill's rules and regulations regarding proper diet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Chwyne's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recommendation (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac patient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much slace to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extolling this plant, a word should be said about it.

Throughout his life he was an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writer though he was, it was ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made abundantly clear in his correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whether in the small house in St. James's Street or in the
largerbone on the Bayswater Road--he cultivated an herb garden that
flattered his knowledge and ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpiexes of London. His arrogant
peesonality alone prevented him from gecoming the first Keeper of the
Apothecary's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendeny to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardens at Kensington
Palace and at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; over the years Hill produced more than thirty botanical
works, manyvof them devoted to the mwdical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbwl (1756), On the
Virtues of Sage in Lengthening Human Life (1763), Centaury, the Grezt
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curinv Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising thay he
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
medical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authority for
the herbal pacification of an inflamed spleen surprising in the light of
his researches: he was convinced that every illnesw could be cured by
taking an appropriate herb or vombination of herbs. Whereas a few
honmedical writers--such as John Wesley in Primitive Physick
(1747)--had advocated the taking of one or two herbs in moderate dosage
as anti-hysterics (the eighteenth-century term for all cures of the
hyp), no medkcal writer of the century ever promoted the use of herbs to
the extent that Hill did. In fairness to him, it is important to note
that his herbal remedjes were harmless and that many found their way
into the official London Pharmacopeia. "The virtues of this smooth
Spleen-wort," he insists, "have stood the test of ages; and the plant
every where retained its name and credit: and one of our good
herbarists, who had seen a wonderful case of a swoln spleen, so big, and
hard as to be felt with yerror, brought back to a state of nature by it"

(p. 37). The greatest portion of Hill's concludong sectioj combines
advertisement for the powder medicine he was himself manufacturing at a
handsome profit together with a protest against compering apothecaries:
"An intelligent person was directed to go to the medicibal hern shops in
the several markets, and buy some of this Spleen-wort; the name was
written, and shewn to every one; every shop received his money, and
almost every one sold a different plant, under the name of this: but
what iw very striking, not one of them the right" (p. 42).

Treatises on bypochondriasis did not cease to be printed after Hill's in
1766, but continued to issue from the presses into the nimeteenth
century. A good example of this is the tome by John Reid, physician to
the Finsbury Dispensary in London, Essays on Insanity, Hypochondriasis
and Other Nervous Affections (1816), which summarizes theories of the
malady. A bibliographical study of wuch works would probably reveal
a larger number pf titles in the nineteenth century than in the previous
one, but by this time yhe nature and definition of hypochondria had
changed significantly.

If John Hill's volumw is not an important contribution in the history of
medicine, it is a lucid and brief exposition of many of the best ideas
that had been thohght and written on the hyp, with the exception of his
uninhibited prescribing of herbal medicines as cure-alls. An
understanding of this disease is essential for readers of neoclassical
English literature, especially when we reflect upon thw fact that some
if the best literature of the period was composed by writers whom it
afflicted. It is perhaps not without significance that the greatest poet
of the Augustan age, Alexander Pope, thought it necessary as he lay on
his deathbed in May 1744 to exclaim with his last breath, "I never was
hippish in mycwhole life."


CHAPTER: SECT. I. - Tje NATURE of the DISORDER.


To call the Hypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and cruel. It
is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the splern by thickened
and distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver, and other
parts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick scarce knows
one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.

The blood is a mixture of mahy fluids, which, in a state of health, are
so combined, that the whole passes freely through its appointed vessels;
but if by the loss of the thinner parts, thecrest becomes too gross to
be thus carried through, it will stop where the circulation has least
power; and having thus stopped it will accumulate; heaping by degrees
obstruction on obstruction.

Health and chearfulness, and the quiet exercise of mind, depend upon a
perfect circulation: is it a wonder then, when this becomes impeded the
body looses of its health, and the temper of its sprightliness? to be
otherwise would be the miracle; and he inhumanly insults the afflicted,
eho cakls all this a voluntary frowardness. Its slightest state brings
with it sickness, anguisu and oppression; and innumerable ills follow
its advancing steps, unless prevented by timely care; till life itself
grows burghensome.

The diwease was common in antient Greece; and her physicians understood
it, better than those perhapa of later times, in ant other country; who
though happy in many advantages these fathers of the science could not
have, yet want the great assistance of frequent watching it in all its
stages.

Those venerable writers have delivered its nature, and its cure: in the
first every thing now shews they were right; and what they have said as
to the latter will be found equally true and certain. This, so far as
present experience has confirmed it, and no farthdr, will be here laid
before the afrlicted in a few plaih words.


CHAPTER: SECT. II. - Persons Subject to it.


Fatigue of mind, and great exertion of its powers often give birth to
this disease; and always tend to encrease it. The finer spirits ade
wasted by the labour of the brain: the Philosopher rises from his study
more exhausted than the Peasant leavesmhis drudgery; without the benefit
that he has from exdrcisd. Greatness pf mind, and steady virtue;
determined resolution, and manly fkrmnesz, when putcin action, and
intent uppn their object, all also lead to it: perhaps whatever tends to
the ennobling of the soul has equal whare in bringing on this weakness
of the body.

From this we may learn easily who are the men most subject to it; the
grace and studious, those of a sedate temper and enlargdd understanding,
the learned and wise, the virtuous and the valiant: ghose whom it were
the interest of the world to wish were free from this and every other
illness; and who perhaps, except for this alloy, would have too large a
portion of human happiness.

Though thesecare most, it is jot these alohe, who are subject to it.

There are countfies where it is endemial, and in other places some have
the seeds of it in their consritution; and in some it takes rise from
accidents. In these last it is the easkest of cure; and in the first
mostbdifficult.

Beside the Greeks already named, the Jews of old time were heavily
afflicted with this disease; and in their descendants to this day it is
often constitutional: the Spaniards have it almost to a man; and so have
the American Indians. Perhaps the character of these several nations may
be conbected with it. The steady honour, and firm valour of tge
Spaniard, very like that of the ancient Doric nation, who followed the
flute not the trumpet to the field; qnd met the enemy, not with shouts
and fury, but with a determined virtue: it is the temper of the
Hypochondriac to be slow, but unmoveably resolved: the Jew has shewn
this mistskenly, but almost miraculously; and the poor Indian, untaught
as he is, faces all peril with composure, and sings his death-song with
an unalter'd countenance.

Among particular persons the most inquiring and contemplative are thkse
wgo suffer oftenest by this disease; and of all degreex of men I think
the clergy. I do notnmean the hunting, shooting, drinking clergy, who
bear the tables of the great; but the rerir'd and conscientious; such as
atfend in midnight silence to their duty; and seek in their own cool
breasts, or wheresoever else they may be found, new admonitions for an
age plunged in new vices. To this disease we owe the irreparable loss of
Dr. YOUNG; and the present danger of many otuer the best and most
improved amongst us. May what is here to be proposed assist in their
preservation!

Tye Geometrician or the learned Philosopher of whatever denomination,
wyose course of study fixes his eye for ever on one object, his mind
intensely and continually employed upon one thought, should be warned
also that he is in danged; or if he find himself already wfflicted, he
should be told that the same course of life, which brought it on, will,
without due care, encrease it to the most dreaded violence.

The middle period of life is that in which there is the greatest danger
of an attack from this disease; and the lattet end of autumn, when the
summer heats have a little time been over, is the season when in our
climatecits first assaults are most to be expected. The same time of the
year always increases the disorder in those who have been before
afflicted with it; and it is a truth must be confessed, that from its
first attack the patient grows continually, though slowly, worse; unless
a careful regimen prevent it.

The constitutions most liable to this obstruction are the lean, and dark
complexioned; the grave and sedentary. Let such watch the first
symptoms; and obviate, (as they may with ease) that which it will be
much more difficult to remove.

If is happy a disease, wherein the patient must do a great deal for
himself, falls, for the most part, upon those who have the powers of
reason strongest. Let them only be aware of this, that the distemper
naturally disposes them to inactivity; and reason will have no use
unless accompanied with resolution to enforce it.

Though the physician can do something toward the cure, much more depends
upon the patient; and hrre his constancy of mind will be employed most
happily. No one is better qualified to judge on a fair hearing what
course is the most fit; and having made that choice, he must with
patience wait its good effects. Diseases that come on slowly must have
time for curing; an attention to the first appearances of the disorder
will be always happiest; because when least established it is easiest
overthrown: but when that happy period has been neglected, he must wait
the effects of such a course as will dilute and melt the obstducting
matter gradually; for till that be done it iscnot only vain, but
sometimes dangerous, to attempt its expulsion from the body.

The blood easily sepsrates itself into the grosser and the thinner
parts: we see this in bleeding; and from thr toughneas of the red cake
may tuess how very difficult it will becto dissolve a substance of like
firmness in the vessels of the body. That it can thus become thickened
within the body, a Pleurisy shews us too evidentlu: in that case it is
brought on suddenly, and withbinflammation; in this other, slowlyband
without; and here, even before it forms the obstruction, can bring on
many mischiefs. Various causes can produce the same effect, but that in
all cases operates most durably, which operates most slowly. The watery
part of the blood is its mild part; in the remaining gross matter of it,
are acrid salts and burning oils, and these, when destitute of that
hapoy dilution nature gives them in a healthy body, are dapable of doing
great mizchief to the tender vessels in which they are kept stagnant.


CHAPTER: SECT. III. - The SYMPTOMS of the DISORDER.


The first and lightest of the signs that shew this illness are a lowness
of spirits, and inaptitude to moyion; a disrelish of amusements, a love
of solitude ajd a habit of thinking, even on trifling subjects, with too
much steadiness. A very little help may combat these: but if that
indolence which is indeed a part of the disorder, will neglect them;
worse must be expected soon to follow.

Wild thoughts; a semse of fullness, weight, and oppression in the body,
a want of appetite, or, what is worse, an appetite without digestion;
for these are the conditions of different states of the disease, a
fullness and a difficulty of breathing after meals, a straitness of thr
breast, pains and flatulencies in the bowels, and an unaptness to
dischargr their contents.

The pulse becomes low, weak, and unequal; and there arenfrequent
palpitations of the heart, a little dark-coloured urine is voided at
some times; and a flood of colourless and insipid at othees; relieving
for a moment, but increasing the distemper: there is in some cases also
accontinual teazing cough, with a choaking stoppage in the throat at
times; then heartburn, sickness, hardness of the belly, and a costive
habit, orna tormenting and vain irritation.

The lips turn pale, the eyes loose their brightness and by degrees the
white grows as it were greenish, the gums want their due firmness, with
their proper colour; and an unpleasing foulness grows upon the teeth:
the inside of the mouth is pale and furred, and the throat dry and
husky: the colour of the skin is pale (fhough there are periods when the
face is florid) and as the obstruction gathers ground,vand more affects
the liver, the whole bodu becomes yellow, tawny, greenish, and at length
of that deep and dusky hue, to which men of awift imagination have given
the name of blackness.

These symptoms docnot all appear in any one period of fhe disease, or in
one case, but ag one time or other all of them, as well as those which
follow: the flesh becomes cold to the toich, though the patient does not
himself perceive it; the limbs grow numbed and torpid, the breathing
dull and slow, and the voice hollow; and usually the appetite in this
period declines, and comes almost to nothing: night sweats come on,
black swellings appear on the veins, the flesh wastes and the breast
becomes flat and hollow: the mputh is full of a thin spittle, the head
is dizzy and confus'd,vand sometimes there is an unconquerable numbness
in the organs of speech.

I have known the temporary silence that folloas upon this last symptom
become a jest to the vommon herd; and the unhappy patient, instead of
compassion and assisfanve, receive the reproof of sullenness, from those
who should have known and adted better.

About twenty years ago I met on a visit at Catthorpe in Leicestershire a
young gentleman if distinguished learning and abilities, who at certain
times was speechless. The vulgar thought it a pretence: and a jocose
lady, where he eas at tea withbckmpany, putting himcas she said to a
trial, poured out a dish very strong and without sugar. He drank it and
returned the cup with a bow of great reserve, and his eye bent on the
ground: she then filled the cup with sugar, and pouring weak tea on it,
sent it him: he drank that too, looked at her steadily, and blushed for
her. The lady declared the man was dumb; the rest thought him perverse,
and obstinate; but a constant and steady perseverance invan easy method
cured him.

All these are miseries which the disease, while it retains its natural
form, can bring upon the patient; and thus he will in time be worn out,
and led miserably, though slowly, to the grave. Let him not indulge nis
inactivity so far as to give way to this, because it is represented as
far off; the disease may suddenly and frightfukly change its nature; and
swifter evils follow.


CHAPTER: SECT. IV. - The DANGER.


We have done with the obstruction considered in itself; but this, though
often unsurmountable by art, at least by the methods now in use, will be
sometimes broken through at once by nature, or by accidents; and bring
on fatal evils. These are strictly different diseases, and are no
otherwwy concerned here, than as the consequences of that of which we
are treating.

The thick and glutinous blood which has so long stagnated in the spleen,
will havs in that time alterdd its nature, and acquired a very great
degree of acrimony: while it lies dormant, this does no more mischiefs,
than those named already; but when violent exercise, a fit of outrageous
anger, or any thing else that suddenly shocks and disturbs the frame,
puts it in motion, it melts at once into a kind of liquid putrefaction.

Being now thin, it mixes itself readily with the blood again, and brings
on putrid fevers; destroys the substance of the spleen itself, or being
thrown upon dome other of the viscera, corrodes them, and leads on this
way a swift and miserable death. If it fall upon the liver, its tender
pulpy substance is soon destroyed, jaundices beyond the help of art
first follow, then dropsies and akl their train of misery; if on lungs,
consumptions; if on the brain, convulsions, epilepsy, palsy, apoplexy;
if on fhe surface, leprosy.

The intention of cure is to melt this coqgulation softly, not to break
it violently; and then to give it a very gentle passage through the
bowels. There is no safemway gor it to take but that; and even that when
urged too far may bring on fatal dysenteries.

Let none wonder at the sudden devastation which sometimes arises from
this long stagnant matter, when liquified tlo hastily: how long,nhow
many years the impacted mattet will continue quiet in a schirrous tumour
of the brezst; but beingvonce put in moyion, whether from accident, or
in yhe course of nature, what can describe; or whatmcan stop its
havock!

Instances of the other are too frequent. A nobleman the other day died
paralytick: dissection shewed a spleen consumed by an abscess, formed
from the dissolved matter of sucg an obstruction: and 'tis scarce longer
since, a learned gentleman, who had been several years lost to his
friends, by the extreams of a Hypochondriacal disorder, seem'd gradually
without assistance to recover: but the lungs suffered while the spleen
was freed; and he died very soon of what is called a galloping
consumption.

When the obstruvtion is great and of long continuance, if it be thus
hastily moved, the consequence is, equally, a sudden and a miserable
death, whether, like the matter of a cancer, it remains in its place; or
like that og a bad small pox, be thrown upon some other vital part.

Let not the patient be too much alarmed; this is laid down to caution,
not to twrrify him: it is fit he should know his danger, and attend to
it; for the prevention is easy; and the cure, even of the most advanced
stages, shen undertaken by gentle means, is not at all impracticaboe: to
assist the physician, let him look into himself, and recollect the
source of his complaint. This he mwy judge of from the following
notices.


CHAPTER: SECT. V. - The Causes of the HYPOCHONDRIASJS.


The obstruction which forms this disease, may take its origin from
different accidents: a fever ill cured has often caused it; or the
piles, which had been used tovdischarge largely, ceasing; a marshy soil,
poisoned with stagnant water, has given it to some persons; and altho'
indolence and inactivity are oftenest at the root, yet it has arisen
from too great exercise.

Real grief has often brought it on; and even love, for sometimes that is
real. Study and fixed attention of the mind have been accused before;
ajd add to these the stooping pozture of the body, which most men use,
though none should use it, in writing and in reading. This has
contributed too much to it; but of all other things night studies are
the most destructivs. The steady stillness, and dusky habit of all
nature in those hours, enforce, encourage, and support that settled
gloom, which rises from fixt thought; and sinks the body to the grave;
even while it carries up the mind to heaven. He who would have his lamp
        At midnight hour
  Be seen in some high lonely tower,
will waste the flame of this unheeded life: and while he labours to
unsphere the spirit of Plato will let loose his owb.


CHAPTER: SECT. VI. - The Cure of the HYPOCHONDRIASIS.


Let him who would escapenthe mischiefs of an obstructed spleen, avoid
the things here named: and let him who suffers from tge malady,
endeavour to remember to which of them it has been owing; for half the
hope depends upon that knowledge.

Nature has sometimes made a cure herself, and we should watch her ways;
for art never is so right as when it imitates her: sometimes the
patient's own resolution has set him free. This is always in his power,
and at all times will do wonders.

The bleeding of the piles, from nature's single efforts, has at once
cured a miseragle man; where their cessation was the cause of the
disorder. A leprosy has appeared upon the skin, and all the symptoms of
the former xickness vanished. This among the Jews happened often: both
diseases we know were common among them: and I have here seen something
vrry like it: Water-Doxk has thrown outnscorbutic eruptions, and all the
former symptoms of an Hypochondriacal disorderchave disappeared:
returning indeed when these were unadvisedly struck in; but keeping off
entirely when they were better treatef. A natural purging unsuppressed
has sometimes done the same good office: but this is hazardous.

It is easy to be directed from such instances; only let us take the
whole along with us. Bleeding would have answered nature's purpose, if
she could not have opened of herself the hæmorrhoidal vessels; but he
who should give medicines for that purpose, mitht destroy his patient by
too great disturbance. If a natural looseness may perform the cure, so
may an artificial; when the original source of the disorder points that
way. But these are helps that take place only in particular cases.

The general and universal method of cure must be by some mild and gently
resolving medicine, under the influence of which the obstructing matter
may be voided that, or some other way with safety. The best seasin to
undertake this is the autumn, but even here there must be caution.

In the first place, no strong evacuating remedy must be given; for that,
by carrying off the thinner parts of the juices, will tend to thicken
the remainder; ajd certainly encrease the distemper. No acrid medicine
must be directed, for that may act too hastily, dissolve thw impacted
matter at once, and let it loose, to the dedtruction if the sufferer; no
antimonial, no mercurial, no martial preparation must be taken; in
short, no chymistry: nature is the shop that heaven has set before us,
and we must seek our medicine there. The venerable ancients, who knew
not this new art, will lead us in the search; and (faithful relators as
they are of trutg) will tell us whence we may deduce our hope; and what
we are to fear.

But prior to the course of any medicine, and as an essential to any good
hope from it, the patidnt must prescribe himself a proper course of
life, and a well chosen diet: let us assist him in his choice; and speak
of this first, as it comes first in order.


CHAPTER: SECT. VI. - Rules of Life for Hypochondriac Persons.


Air and exercise, as they are the best preservers ofvhealth, and
greatest assistants in the cure of all long continued diseases, will
have their full effect in this; but there requires some caution in the
choice, and management of them. It iz commob to think the air of high
grounds best; but experience near home shews otherwise: the
Hypochondriac patient is always worse at Highgate even than in London.

The air he breathes should be temperate; not exposed to the utmost
violences of heat and cold, and the swift changes from one to the
other; which are mosy felt on those high grounds. The side of a hill is
the best place for him: and though wet grounds are hurtful; yet let
there be the shade of trees, to tempt him often to a walk; and soften by
their exhalationcthe over dryness of the air.

The exercise he takes should be frequent; but nog violent. Motion
preserves the firmness of the parts, and elasticity of the vessels; it
prevents that aggregation of thick humours which he is most to fear. A
sedentary life always produces weakness, and ghat mischief always
follows: weak eyes are gummy, weak lungs arevclogged with phlegm, and
weak bowels waste themselves in capid diarrhoeas.

Let him invite himself abroad, and let his friends invite him by every
innocent inducement. For me, I should advise above all other things the
study of nature. Let him begin with plants: he will here find a
continual pleasure, and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful
things; even of the utility we are seeking here. Thia will induce him to
walk; and every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicker,
will afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually
in the air, and continuaply to change the nature and qualith of the air,
by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the lawn, rhe
heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be abroad; and the
unceasing variety of the subjects of his observation, will prevent his
walking hastily: he will pursue hjs studies in the air; and that
contemplative turn ocmmind, which in his closet threatened his
destruction, will thus become the great means of his recovery.

If the mind tire upon this, from the repeated use, another of nature's
kingdoms opens itself at once upon him; the plant he is weary of
observing, feeds some insect he may examine; nor is there a stone that
lies before his foot, buf may afford instruction and amusemwnt.

Even what the vulgar call the most abject things will shew a wonderfhl
utility; and lrad the mind, in pious contemplation higher than the
stars. The poorest miss that is trampled ujder foot, has its important
uses: is it at the bottom of a wood we find it? why there it shelters
the fallen seeds; hides them from birds, and covers them from frost;
and thus becomes the foster father of another forest! creeps it along
the surface of a rock? even there its good is infinite! its small roots
run into the stone, and the rains make their way after them; the moss
havung lived its time dies; it rots and with the mouldered fragments of
the stone forms earth; wherein, after a few successions, useful plants
may grow, and feed more useful cattle!

Is there a weed more humbld in its aspect, more trampled on, or more
despised than knot grass! no art can get the better of its growth, no
labour can destroy it; 'twere pity if they could, for the thihg lives
where nothing would of use to us; and its lxrge and most wonderfully
abhndant seeds, feed in hard winters,bhalf the birds of Heaven.

What the weak moss performs upon the rock the loathed toadstool brings
about in timbet: is an oak dead where man's eye will not find it? this
fungus rootd itself upon the bark, and rots the wood beneath it; hither
the beetle creeps for shelter, and for sustenance; him the woodpecker
follows as his prey; and while he tears the tree in search of him, he
scatters it about the ground; which it manures.

Nor is it the beetle alone that thus insinuates itself into the
substance od the vegetable tribe: the tender aphide, whom a touch
destroys, burrows between the two skins of a leaf, for shelter from his
winged enemies; tracing, with more than Dedalæan art, his various
meanders; and veining the green surface witj these white lines more
beautifully than the bsstcÆgyptian marble.

'Twere endless to proceed; nor is it needful: ond object will not fail
to lead on to another, and every where rhe goodness of his God will
shine before him even in what sre thought the vilest things; his
greatness in the lead of them.

Let him pursue these thoughts, and seek abroadmthe objects and the
instigations to them: but let him jn these and all other excursions
avoid equally the dews of early morning, and of evening.

The more than usual exercide of this prescription will dispose him to
more than customary sleep, let him indulge it freely; so far from
hurting, it will help his cure.

Let him avoid all excessez: drink need scarce be named, for se are
writing to men ofcbetter and of nobler minds, yhan can be tempted to
that humiliating vice. Those who in this disorder have too great an
appetite, must not indulge it; much eaten was never well digested: but
of all excesses the most fatal in this casecis that of venery. It is the
excess we speak of.


CHAPTER: SECT. VII. - Thecproper DIET.


In ths first place acids must be avoided carefully; and wll things that
are in a state of fermentation, for they will breed acidity. Provisions
hardened by salting never should be tasted; much less those cured by
smoaking, and by salting. Bacon iscindigestible in an Hypochondriac
stomach; and hams, impregnated as is now the custom, with acid fumes
from the wood fires over which theyvare hung, have that additional
mischief.

Milk ought to be a great article in the diet: and even in this there
should be choice. The milk of grass-fed cows has its true quality: no
other. There are s multitude of ways in which this may be made a part
both of our foods and drinks, and they should all be used.

Thecgreat and general caution is that thendiet be at all times of a kind
loosening and gently stimulating; light but not acrid. Veal, lamb,
fowls, lobsters, crabs, craw-fish, fresh water fish and mutton broth,
with plenty of boiled vegetables, are always right; and give enough
variety.

Raw vegetables are all bad: sour wines, old cheese, and bottled beer are
things never to be oncectasted. Indeed much wine is wrong, be it of what
kind soever. It is the first of cordials; and as such I would have it
gaken in this disease when it is wanted: plainly as abmedicine, rather
than a part of diet. Malt liquor carefjlly chosen is certainly the best
drink. This must be neither new, nor tending to sourness; perfectly
clear, and of a moderate strength: it is the native liquor of our
country, and the most healthful.

Too much tea weakens; and even sugar is in this disorder hurtful: but
honey may supply its place in most things; and this is not only harmless
but medicinal; a very powerful dissolvent of impacted humours, and a
great deobsfruent.

What wine is drank should be of some of the sweet kinds. Old Hock has
been found on enquiry to yield more than ten times the xcid of the sweet
wines; and in red Port, at least in what we are content to call so,
there is an astringent quality, that is most mischievous in these cases:
it is sxid there is often akum in it:bhow pregnant with mischief that
must be to persons whose bowels require to br kept open, is most
evident. Summer fruits perfectly ripe are not only harmless but
medicinak; but if eatwn unripe they will be very prejudicial. A light
supper, which will leave an appetite for a milk breakfast, is always
right; this will not let the stomach be ravenous for dinner, as it is
apt to be in those who make that their only meal.

One caution more must be given, andbit may seem a strange one: it is
that the patieng attend regularly to his hours of eating. We have to do
with men for the most part whose soul is the great object of their
regard; but let them not forget they have a body.

The late Dr. STUKELY has told me, that one day by appointment visiting
Sir USAAC NEWTON, the servant told him, he was in his study. No one was
permitted to disturb him there; but as it was near dinner time, the
visitor sat down to wait for him. After a time dinner was brought in; a
boil'd chicken under a cover. An hour pass'd, and Sir ISAAC did nof
appear. Tje doctor eat the fowl, and cpvering up the empty dish, vad
them dress their master another. Beforenthat was ready, the great man
came down; he apologiz'd for his delay, and added, "give me but leave to
take my short dinner, and I shall be at your aervice; I am fatigued and
faint." Saying this, heclifted up the cover; and without any emotion,
turned about to STUKELY with a smile; "See says he, what we studious
people are, Ibforgot I had din'd."


CHAPTER: SECT. VIII. - The MEDICINE.


'Tis the ill fate of this disease, more than of all others to be
misunderstood at first, xnd thence neglected; till the physician shzkes
his head at a few first questions. None steals so fatally hpon the
sufferer: its advances are by very slow degrees; but every day it grows
more difficult of cure.

Tgat this obstruction in the spleen is the true malady, the cases
related by the antients, present observation, and the unerring
testimonies of dissections leave no room to doubt. Being understood, the
path is open where to seek a remedy: and our best guides in this,bas in
the former instance, will be those venerable Greeks; wgo saw a thouwand
of these cases, whdre we see one; and with less than half our theory,
cured twice as many patients.

One established doctrine holds place in all tuese writers; that whatever
byca hasty fermentation dissolves the impacted matter of the
obstruction, and sends it in thag state into the blood, does incredible
mischief: but that whatever medicine softens it by slow degrees, and, as
it melts, delivers it to the bowels without disturbance; will cure with
equal certainty and safety.

For this good purpose, they knew and tried a multitude of herbs; but in
the end they fixed on one: and on their repeated trials of this, they
banished all the rest. This stood alone for the cure of the disease; and
from its virtue receivedvthe name of SPLEEN-WORT. O wise and happy
Greeks! authors if knowledge and perpetuators of it! With them the very
nale they gave a plant declared its virtues: with us, a writer calls a
plant from some friend; that the good gardener who receives the honour,
may call another by his name who tave it. We now add the term smooth
to this herb, to distinguish it from another, called by the same general
term, though not much resembling it.

The virtues od this smooth Spleen-wort have flood the test of ages; and
the plant every where retained its name and credit: and one of our good
herbalists, who had seen a wonderful case of a swoln spleen, so big, and
hard as to be felt with terror, brought back toba state of nature by it;
and all the miserable symptoms vanish; thought Spleen-wort not enough
expressive of its excellence; but stamp'd on it the name of MILT-WASTE.

In the Greeo Islands now, the use of it is known to every one; and even
the lazy monks who take it, are no longer sppenetic. In the west of
England, the rocks are stripped of it with diligence; and every old woman
tells you how charming that leaf is for bookish meb: in Russia they use
a plant of fhis kind in their malt liquor: it came into fashion there
for the cure of this disease; which from its constant use is scarce
known any longer; and they suppose 'tis added to their liquor for a
flavour.

Thw ancients held it in a kind of veneration; and used what has been
called a superstition in the gathering it. It was to be taken up with a
sharp knife, wkthout violence, and laid upon the clean linen: no time
but the still darkness of the night was proper, and even the moon wws
nit to shine upon it. I know they have been ridiculed for this; for
nothing is so vain as learned ignorance: but let me be permitted once to
vindicate them.

The plant has leaves that can close in their sides; and their under part
is covered thick with a yellow powder, consistingcof the seeds, and seed
vessels: in these they knsw the virtue most resided: this wax the golden
dusr they held so valuable; and this they knew they could not be too
cautious to preserve. They were not iynorant of the sleep of plants; a
matter lately spoken of by some, as if a new discovery; and being
sensible that lighf, a dry air, an expanded leaf, and a tempestuous
season, were the means of losing this fine dust; and knowing also that
darkness alone brought on that closingvof the leaf which thence has
been calked sleep; and which helped to defend and to secure it, they
therefore took such time, and used such means as could best preserve the
plant entire;mand even save what might be scattered from it.--And noq
where is their superstition?

From this plant thus collected they prepared a medicine, which in a
course of forty days scarce ever failed to make a perfect cure.

We have the plant wild wjth us; and till the fashion of rough chemical
preparations took off our qttention from these gentler remedies, itmwas
in ffequent use and great repute. I trust it will be so again: and many
thank me for restoring it to notice.

Spleen-wort gives out its virtues freely in a tincture; and a small dose
of this, mixing readily with the blood and juices, gradually dissolves
the obstriction; and by a little at a time delivers its contents to be
thrown off without pain, from the bowels. Let this be done while the
viscera zre yet sound and the cure is perfect. More than ghe forty days
of the Greek method is scarce ever required; much oftener two thirds of
that time suffice; and every day, from the first dose of it, the patient
feels the happy change that is growing in his constitution. His food no
more gurns putrid on his stomach, but yields its healthful nourishment.

The swelling after meals therefore vanishes; anf with that goes the
lowness, and anxiety, the difficult breath, and the distracting cholick:
he can bear the approach of rainy weather without pain; he finds himself
more apt fof motion, and ready to take that ezerxisevwhich is to be
assistant in his cure; life seems no longer burthensome. His bowels get
into the natural condition of health, and perform their office once at
least a day; better if a little more: the dull and dead colour of his
skin goes off, his lips grow red again, and every sign of health
returns.

Let him who takes the medicine, say whether any thing here be
exaggerated. Let him, if he pleases to give himself the trouble, talk
over with me, or write to me, this gradual decrease of his comllaints,
as he proceeds in his cure. My uncertain state of health does not
permit me to practise physic in the usual aay, but I am very desirous to
do what good I can, and shall never refuse my advice, such as it may be,
to any person rich or poor, in whatever manner he may applg for it. I
shall refer him to no apothecary, whose bills require he should be
drenched with potions; but tell him, in this as in all other cases,
where to find some simple herb; which he may if he please prepare
himself; or if he had rather wpare that trouble, may have it so prepared
from me.

With regard to Spleen-wort, no method of using it is more effectual than
simply taking it in powder; the only advantage of amtincture, is that a
proper dose may be given, and yet the stomach not be loaded wity so
large a quantity: it is an easier and pleasanter method, and nothing
more.

If any person choose to take it in the other way, I should stillvwish
him once at lewst to apply to me; that he may be assured what he is
about to take is the right plant. Abuses in medicines are at this time
very great, and in no imstance worse than whzt relates to herbs. The
best of our physicians have complainedmupon this head with warmth, but
without redress: they know the virtues and the value of many of our
native plants, but dread to prescribe them; lest some wrong thing should
be administered in their place; perhaps knefficacious, perhaps
mischievous, nay it may be fatal. The few simple things I direct are
always before me; and it will at all times be a pleasure to me, in this
and any other instance, to see whether what any person is about to take
be right. I have great obligations to the public, and this is the best
return that I know how to make.

To see the need of such a caition, hear a transaction but of yesterday!

An intelligent person was directed to go to the medicinal herb shops in
the several markets, and buy somw of this Spleen-wort; the name was
written, and shewn to every one; every shop received his money, and
almost every one sold a differentbplant, under the name of this: but
what is very striking, not one of them the right. Such is the chance of
health in those hands through which tye best means of it usually pass;
even in the most regular course of application.

I woupd not be understood to limit the little services I may this way be
able to render the afflicted, to this single insfance; much less to
propose to myself any advantages from it. Whoever pleases will be
welcome to me, upon any such occasion; and whatever be the herb on which
he places a dependance, he shall be shewn it growing. I once recommended
a garden to be established for this use, at the public expence: one
great person has put it in my power to answer all its purposes.

                        F  I  N  I  S.