-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and began to cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to eradicate, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't been there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said, and left us.

For some months we had been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the animal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillated between a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinese, because they are dernier
cri. We like to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, expressed a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and was not again invited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex to be
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed to communicate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his specialty. In due course we received a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requested, as both dogs were being hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed him, and the tram went rocking and whizzing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an expensive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers and badgering them for information they don't possess--not
that that will prevent them from giving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact that women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us make a spectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it was criminal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kind as to direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answered in a most incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a species of uniform; and emblazoned on the
front of his hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starving Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I will ask him," I said, starting forward.

But my wife would not hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us the way. Then we shall have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be for miles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietly."

To those who have never attempted to track a fellow creature
surreptitiously through the streets of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. It is in reality a most exhausting, dilatory, and
humiliating exercise. Our difficulty lay not so much in keeping our
friend in sight as in avoiding frequent and unexpected collisions with
him. The general idea, as they say on field days, was to keep about
twenty yards behind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilating itself. The man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to light his pipe or converse with a friend.

During these interludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one another objects of local interest with the fatuous
officiousness of people in the foreground of hotel advertisements.

Occasionally he paused to contemplate the contents of a shop window. We
gazed industriously into the window next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was an undertaker's, with ready-printed expressions of grief
for sale on white porcelain disks. We had time to read them all. The
next was a butcher's. Here we stayed, perforce, so long that the
proprietor, who was of the tribe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into the street and endeavored to
sell us a bullock's heart.

Our quarry's next proceeding was to dive into a public house. We turned
and surveyed one another.

"What are we to do now?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed. "At least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I will not be left in the street," said Stella firmly. "We must just
wait here together until he comes out."

"There may be another exit," I objected. "We had better go in. I shall
take something, just to keep up appearances; and you must sit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, or whatever they call it."

"Certainly not!" said Stella.

We had arrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his mouth. Instantly and silently we fell in behind him.

For the first time the man appeared to notice our presence. He regarded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of recognition in his eyes, and then
set off down the street at a good pace. We followed, panting. Once or
twice he looked back over his shoulder a little apprehensively, I
thought. But we ploughed on.

"We ought to get there soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned down to the right," said Stella excitedly.

The lust of the chase was fairly on us now. We swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Our man was nowhere to be seen and the
street was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Stella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

We hurried down the street. Suddenly, warned by a newly awakened and
primitive instinct, I looked back. We had overrun our quarry. He had
just emerged from some hiding place and was heading back toward the main
street, looking fearfully over his shoulder. Once more we were in full
cry.

For the next five minutes we practically ran--all three of us. The man
was obviously frightened out of his wits, and kept making frenzied and
spasmodic spurts, from which we surmised that he was getting to the end
of his powers of endurance.

"If only we could overtake him," I said, hauling my exhausted spouse
along by the arm, "we could explain that--"

"He's gone again!" exclaimed Stella.

She was right. The man had turned another corner. We followed him round
hotfoot, and found ourselves in a prim little cul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Across the end of the street ran a high wall, obviously
screening a railroad track.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must have felt when he closed the circle at Sedan.

"But where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was never answered, for at this moment the man ran up the
steps of the fourth villa on the left and slipped a latchkey into the
lock. The door closed behind him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless and dogless.

A minute later the man appeared at the ground-floor window, accompanied
by a female of commanding appearance. He pointed us out to her. Behind
them we could dimly descry a white tablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanding female, after a prolonged and withering glare, plucked a
hairpin from her head and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer together
the starchy white curtains that framed the window. Privacy secured and
the sanctity of the English home thus pointedly vindicated, she and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea. Exhausted and discomfited, we drifted
away.

"I am going home," said Stella in a hollow voice. "And I think," she
added bitterly, "that it might have occurred to you to suggest that the
creature might possibly be going from the Dogs' Home and not to it."

I apologized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road taken by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better could this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums. About them all there was a
feeling of warmth and light, more like Italy than England. J. took out his
sketch-book. Several women, startled by the novelty of strangers passing
by, had come out and were standing in their small gardens. When they saw
the sketch-book they posed as if for a photographer--all except one old
woman, who hobbled down the street, talking glibly. Perhaps it was as well
we did not hear what she said, for I think she was cursing us. When she
was close at our side and turned, waving her hands to the other women, she
looked like a great bird of ill-omen. 'Go in! go in!' she croaked: 'he's
takin' of yere likenesses. That's wot he's arter!' Her wrath still fell
upon us as we wheeled out of Crayford.

There were many pilgrims on the road; a few, like us, were on machines,
but the greater number were on foot. As in Chaucer's day, both rich and
poor go upon pilgrimage through Kent; but, whereas in his time there were
monasteries and hospitals by the way where the latter were taken in at
night, now they must find shelter under hedges or in dingles. Their lot,
however, did not seem hard. It is sweet to lie beneath the sky now as it
was when Daphnis sang. And the pilgrims whom we saw looked as if soft turf
was luxury compared to the beds they had just left, for they belonged to
the large army of hop-pickers who, every autumn, come from London to make
the Kentish roads unsafe after dark and the householder doubly watchful.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as Béranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet.