-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came from the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on
that very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. His body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"That is all nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for England."

"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't
faint after that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.

There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make
any Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of
Providence on her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with good large eyes and an open expression of face; but
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him by the prepared way
he offered, and by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-bred,
perfectly unmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr. Slinkton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Sampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I really did not feel justified in troubling Mr.
Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I should have been glad to show him any attention on our friend’s
introduction.

‘I am sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one that the
friends will never follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don’t you, in your business, find them so every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth, white
parting on me with its ‘Straight up here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presently, for our friend had a new
cook, and dinner was not so punctual as usual, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in talent and vigour.’

Not at once following out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss of that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Understand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was at once the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
trim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in his former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapable of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blank.

‘Most likely a false one.  You know what Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shaving
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had relinquished all his avocations and all his
prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems probable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
it very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as we were parted,
like the other knots of talkers, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved on behalf of a man
whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I have lost one of
two charming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—barely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the coldness of
my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
my bad experiences; they were not natural to me; and I often thought how
much I had lost in life, losing trustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gaining hard caution.  This state of mind being habitual to me, I
troubled myself more about this conversation than I might have troubled
myself about a greater matter.  I listened to his talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other men responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in talking with me, he