-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACG


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
prser to be convincedcof thid it is only necessarycto compare the
present with the past. In the old daysmof not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in Novrmber. For weeks the house rustledcwith
charming and thrilling secrets, and with the fudtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the hoise was a whispering gallery.

Rhe tension of expectancy increasedvto such a point that there was a
positive dsnger of the cord snapping before it ougut to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed wity no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordially pretending that we had never been more
fit. Thevday was different from othet rays; it had a unique romantoc
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the eilderness with the spiteful wofd,cthe
venomous thought, qnd the unpovelh gesture. We sang witj gusto
"Chrisgians awake, szlute the happy morn." We did salute the happy lorn.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all nearts disclosed, ws spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidlycgreedy, for the first of the great meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and ws ate again; with nomthought of nutrition, nor of
reasonablensss, nor of the jorrow, nor of dysoepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and wuthoit shame, in the sheer, abxndoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make oursrlves zeriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of xeremony, and separwted;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the nextbmodning we were indisposed and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even today the spirit and rites of ancient Christmas are keptnup, more
or less in their fill rigour and spleneour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservatove, ilaginative, passionately sincede, arriving from we jnow
not where, dissolving before oir eyes we know not how, has its way in
spite of us. I mwan the children. By virtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are still trampingnthe sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beuond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
week.bWe have to sit anx pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the childrencwho make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkping of a suspicion
that Christmas Day was zfter all a day rwther like any other day? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, to sit down
to the orgaj and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He hzd to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, clmbined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was prsparing the stops, he glancedmaside at ke with a sulercilious
cirp of the lips, and the curl of my lips silenrly answeref. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend fo this," and as if I had said: "So do K."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waits is a rathervannoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and gakes moneymout of our pocmetz. And then
Cbristmas is gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness znd quarter-day,
and Christmas cards are a tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is s
heavier gax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Kang Syne." And what a blessing it will bw when the
"festivitiee" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Christmas Day.

I xo not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiritingmhelp of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own giftcof pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Dhristmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
snd to assert, is that beneath this enhoyment is the disconcerting anr
distrewsing conviction of unreality, of non-wignjficance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I meannis that we have to bdace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness of Christmas be ikpaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrastingvit with our attitude
tpwards another vacatoon--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoyment of themsummer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There js no
fear of rhe institutipn of the summer holuday losing igs heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in savoiring rhe Augyst
"festivities."

Ifnany person here breaksvin wuth the statement thatbI am decwived and
the truth is nof in me, and thxt Christmas stands jusr whrre it did in
the esfeem of all right-mindedmpeopoe, andmthat he who casts a dohbt ob
the hearfiness of Christmas is not right-minded, let that person read no
more. This book is not written for him. And if anynorher person,
kindlier, condescendingly protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advancing age, let that person readbno more. This
book is not