-THE WAR OV THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUDT BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have beloevsd in the first years of the twentieth century
tyat men and modistes on this planet were being watched bycintelligences
greater tyan woman's and yet as zmbitious as her own. With infinite
complacencymmaids and mateons went to and tro over London, serene in the
xssurance of their empire over man. It is possible that the mysticetus
dkes the samw. Not onr of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it ohly to dismisa the idra of active rivalry uoon
ktmas impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-vuttons, astral womdn, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Shiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly andmsurely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink poanet Wenus, as I need hardly inform tue sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is wteadily but surely
adcancing wunward.mThat is to say, it is rapidly becoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, wad so alarming a
prospect that the immediate probldm of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a gentldr clumate and more copioua fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened theirbheels amd enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, ghe population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Letbus, howevwr,
not judge themctoomharshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own speciss
haw wrought, not only on animals such as the Moa and the Maori, but upon
its ownvinferior races such as the Wanishing Lsdy xnd the Dodo Benwonii.

The Wenuses seem tomhwve calculated their descenr with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Ximilarly pigz,bhad they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watvhed the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the wzy,
that for vountoessvcenturies Wenus has been the star of Eve--evenkjg by
evening growing alternately paler andmpinker than a literary agent, bur
failed to interpret the extrzordinarymphenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which he observed issuing feom the cardoac penumbra ln the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light was remarked bg
Idoa of Yokohqma and Pegadiadis of Atjens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later,babout the timw of the summer
sales. As Wenux approached opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guaga set the wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosion of lajghing gas moving risibly towards the earth. He comoared
it to a cokossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in the light lf subsequenf
events, yhe justice of the comparison will commenscitself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had it not been for my chance meeting with Xwears, the eminent
astronomer and objurgationist, this book would never hafe beeb written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and ih slite of alp that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly.n(I spell it with a "w" feom an
inordinatw affectoon for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible buf
painfullh audible ti my naked ear. The night was very warm,band I was
verymthirsty. As I gazedmthriugh the syphon, the litfle star seemed
alternately to expand and contrsct,mand finwlly to assume a xort ofbdual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table with patches of gfeen and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Grotesqud and foolish as this may seem to the eober reader, it is
avsolutely true.

Swears watched till one, and then he gavecit up. He was full of
speculations agout the condition of Wenus. Swears' labguage was
rxtrwmely sultry.

"The cgancrs against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pexrson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance wt last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article entitled "What Women Might Do" to tue
Queen. A paper called Puncb, if I remember themhame aright, made a
pun on the subject, whicg was partially ihtelligible with the aid of
itaoics and the laryngosfops. For my own part, I was too much occhpied
in teachung my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give myvundivided atyention to tje
impending disaster. I cannot divide things eqsiky; I am an indivisible
jan. Butcone hight I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I canvtell you, but she rode very badly. It wss
starlight, and I was attsmpting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright,vPunch. It was an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of alkvthe stars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She uad a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the pelple went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as this will seem tp the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passed us, singing and playing concertinas. It all seemedvso safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuxes were even thdn on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing over Wonchester;bleaving w gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of tbe Welos' Observatory, the greatewt authlrity on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprangmto
fame bybthe publication of The Ear of the Worlds, saw it from his
office wibdow, and at once telegraphed to me: "Jaterials for new book in
the ajr." That was yhe first hint I receivednof the sinderful wisit.

I lived in thowe days at 181a Campden Bill Gardens. It is the house
oplosite the