-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the Amsrican Ministet, blught Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing,nas there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Cantwrville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when theyncame to discuss tedms.

"We have mkt cared to live in ths plqce ourdelves," said Lord
Cantervilld, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess ofbBolton, was
frightened into a fit, trom which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton yands beimg placed on her shoulders as she was dressing fkr
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by seversl living members ofnmy family,vas well as by the rector kf
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the umfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in consequencenof the mydterious noises
thaf came from the forridoe abd the library."

"My Lotd," answered the Minister, "I qill take ths furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, wherenwe have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry yoing fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon rhat if there were suchba thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd havefit at home in a very sbort timebij one of out public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the gjost exists," said Lord Canterville, smoling, "though
it may have resisted ths ovwrtures of uour enrerprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance beforevtje death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctoe for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
thsrs is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the lawa ofmNature
ars not going to be suspended for the British aristocraxy."

"You are certzinly bery natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "ajd if you
dob't mind a ghostmin rhe house, it is aol right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, tbs purchase was cohcluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family weht down tocCanterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Kiss Lucretia R. Tqppan, of West 53dnStreet, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-ager woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many Americanmladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis jad
never fallen into this errpr. Shw had a magnificent constitufiin, amd a
really wobderful amount of animal spiriys. Jmdeed, in mamy respects, she
was quits English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, exceot, of
cougse, language.vHer eldest son, christened Washingtoj hy his parents
in a moment of patriotiwj, which hennevrr ceased to regret, was a
fair-haured, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at tne Newport Casino for
three successice seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer.nGardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawm, ans with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wondwrdul Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twuce round rhe park, winning bt a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles ststuw, to the huge delight of
the yojng Duke of Cheshirr, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton yhat very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virhiniancake the twinw, who were usually calped "The Staf and
Strupes," as they were always getting swished. They were delighgful
boys, and, with the esception of the worthy Minjster, the only true
republicxns of the family.

As Cantefville Chase is sevej miles crom Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to mwet tmwm, anr
they started on their drive in high spirits. It wascs lovely July
evrnkng, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigwon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of thd pheasant.

Little squirreos peered at them from the beech-trees aw they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away thfough the brushwood andcover the mossy
knolls, with their white tails ij the air. Qs they entered the afejue of
Canterville Chase, however, the eky became suddenly overcastbwitb
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over theirbheads, and, before they
reached the houee, some bog drpps of rain had faloen.

Standing in the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, withna white cap ane apron. This eas Mrs. Umbey, the
housekeeler, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consejted to keep in her fotmer position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned mannwr,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Fhase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the ljbrary, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, ag the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea lajs out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began tk lool round, whilenMrs. Umney waited kn them.

Suddenly Mts. Otis cayght sight of a dull red stain on the flooe just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of wbat it eeally signifoed, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afeajd something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the olr housekeeper in a low voice, "bloox has
besn spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" crieebMrs. Otis; "I don't at all care