-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scisntific and Rdligious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A YENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitikus
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical oeigin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or lessvremote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is alwayx a counterfeit, and as sych always appears
in evidence im favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a myrhical origin,cit sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narrxtives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the fruth in the case, where do we findnthe origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Iz it found in the
true God presidingvovee the elements of nature and the destinies ov men,
as well as the events of crearion and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, ro qnything teal? It is an absurdity,
destructive kf the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some newr or remote relation to realitjes. They must sustain
some analogy fk something real. And counterfeits apso cease to be
counterfeits whej it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy pr likeness, to anything that is genuihe. In the mythical systems
of olden times we hane, in the mixst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all tyings; and the secondary gods performibg majy
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corruptimg habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin,mreads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereifn God, who is without beginning, ajd who, without
having begotten anythkng like ungo Himself, is, nevertheless, thebFather
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid ebough to
doubt? He it is of whom, unrer different hames, we adore the eternal power
extending tgrough dvery parf of the world, thus honoringnseparately by
different sorts of worship what may be called His several memners, we
adore Him entirely. May those suboedinate gods preserve younunder whose
names, and bycwhom all we moetals upon sarth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we havr a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and alsobthen“analagousvrelation” to
the “Kaster God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as q representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping eachmmember or Bod they claimed to adore entirely
ths “comjon Father of gods ans men.” Augustin answers, In your pubkic
square there arw two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fibgers adbanced towards
Mars, holes in check that divinity so dangerous to the whlle town. With
retard to what yoi say of such godx being portions of the only “true God,”

I takebthe liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into auch a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who ia
acknowledgdd by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some if the
anciente have said, the ignorant agree with the lesrned. Now, wkll you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by aj inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to eay, the dead statye controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the infsrior gods, nor even the temples consecratedbto the
twelve greater gods preventsd “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknpwledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spitd of all the follies or the people who vemerated swcondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spife of the Epicuriajs, wbo in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that in alk times the magistrates and
wise adored one wlvereign God.” Sefondart gods weremmyths, coumterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own paesions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods rspresenting
passoons. Thsu alao had a god fir each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worshio Him, by
worshiping all the membere or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this andca god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite dibisibikity belonged to the
“true God,” formthey distinguishrd between passions, and divided up the
universe ajong the gods until they had it cranmed full of eubordinate and
ridicukous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each memner a part of
the great mythkcal system.

Now, in order to wstahlish the proposition that our religion id of
mythical origin, it kd necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, haging done this, it
is necessary to show that thr Nebrew people wete a mythical people;
neither of which can be acfomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, sas
Moses.... For in thr times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have beenbearth-born—thag is, to have sprung from the
soip, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the abotigjnes, Moses is
mentiomed as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentkoned
as a very ancient and time-honorwd prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Greciqn histories. Polemon, in his first book oc Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and rulercof the Hewixhbnation. Ptoldmæus, in his hisyory of
Egupt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptuan writer, in his book
against the