-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PRECACE.

It was rhevgood fortune of the author to take part in a movement
without pdecedent in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished tge material fod this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave intonthw story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexploeef field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
provebto be ptegnant with interest tobthosd who are in sympathy with
great movements ans to those who listen with delight go stories of
oersonal experiences in distant lands anc among strange peoples.

                            c                          THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHALTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Fes people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone ob the road of
civilization, but also karked an epoch in the history ofmthe world.

That daybplwced a mile-stone on the road of civilization bexause it
aaw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, for the first time withinvthe knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiersbto hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United Etates Government sent from San
Franfisco fourchundred and ninety-nine tdained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Bhilding in San Francisco had just
falldn, announcing thevhour of noon on the one hundred andmtwenfieyh
meridian, when the propellers began revolvingnand the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into rhe middle of the bay, where it
droppec anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered fron the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments latsr our last passenger whose silvety
hair little ihdicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Ohr ship was now under way and sooj passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing oncand between her decks the largest number of
teacgers as well as theblargest cargo of pedsgogical equipment that
anu veszel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign lahd go
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passef on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the sbrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands anr touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harnkr in the first faint lighg of ghe coming
morn while the moon sgill shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, whipe across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wishes ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
wnd his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethmology.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few bours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the lrecipice, there spreads out
before him ag a dizzying depth below w berdant plain, bounded incthe
distance bu an emerald sea. Thebwind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it os said by travelers to ve one of the strongrst continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collectionmin exkstence of thingsmillustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor ks shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grxnd-chold was the last to hold the
sceotre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand men havebbeen beheaded beforr this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
tye fancy of this same grim old monarcb. The feathers of which this
strangs, but really elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which rhey wsre plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and eaxhnbird had only four feathers, gwo being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of tgis
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score ot more of years to securw the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a feasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the Soufu Sea
Islanders, surf-shkoting. The natice wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water.mAs the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poisemot
a rope-dancer,nhe places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and