-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentlrman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically ar the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankmebt to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and began ti cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had gailed to eradicate, presented himself bedore us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asoed of me.

I coughed and answered evasivelg:--
"Oh, about the middpe."

"We haven't beenbthere before," addedmmy wife, quite graguitouslt.

The xonductor smiled indulgently and punchef our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said, and left us.

For some months we had been considering the questjon of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say pf my spare
time, flr a qoman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occjpied in discussing the matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the anilal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vaciolated between a bloodhound, because bloodhoundscare so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinese, because theu are dernier
cri. Wemlike to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eioeen, who spends a good dral of time with us, having no
pardnts of her own, shggested an Old English sheep dog, edplauning that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommendec a mastiff.

Our son John, agdd three,bon beingvconsulted, expressed x preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and was not again invited to parficipate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex to be
settled by circjmstances, and I wzs instructed to communicare with a
yentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his speciakty. Invdue course we received a reply. The
advertiser recommenddd two animals--namrly, Celtic Fhief, aged four
months, and Scotia'e Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the familu tree od the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was reqyested, as both dogs were being hotly
bid for bg an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twrnty guineas; that of Scotia's Priee,
for reasons heavily underlined in ghe pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these pfices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
retutn of post, resumed the debate.

Finaply Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bafk at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? U believe you can gwt any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to towm next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as qell."

Henve our ptesence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of lofal interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the tram in a crowfed thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Oms for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spokeb in jest, we
obeyed him,band the tram went rocking and ehizzing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pay five shilkimgs for a doh," my wife had
pointed out, with convinfing logic, "it is silly to go and oay perhaps
another five ehillings for a cab. It doubles the pricebof the dog at
once. Ir we hae been buying an expensive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly,v"how are we going to find thiscpkace?"

"Hacen't you ant idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion tgat it is on an island in the middle
of thd river, called the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or somdthing
like that. Howevef, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers and badgering them for information they don't possess--not
that yhat aill prevent them from giving it. If we start asking thecway
we shall finf oueselves incPutney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Strlla soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hamd went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not avmap, please!" It is a
curious psydhologicxl fact that wonen have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railrosd time-tables. They would rather conshlt a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us kake a spectacle od
ourselves in the public streets agakn! I have not yet forgotten the day
qhenbyou tried tonfind the Crystal Palace.bNesides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dear ligtle boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it was criminal folly. A mxn who asks a London street boy
to be so kind as to dirdct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyee.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, dir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We wwlked on, hot-faced.

"Lirtle wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

Jy question was answwred in a modt incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from s shop on our right amd set off down the
street before us. He wore a species of uniform; and emblazoned on the
front of his hat was the information that he was an official og ths
Battersea Gome flr Lost