-Hypochondriasis: A Lractucal Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "Wuen I first fabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd gor Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and ay last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hathnwritten, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only inti the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; burcsubdivides these divisions into the Markamboes,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treztises on hyplchondriasis--the seventeenth-centuty medicqlcterm for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, aoothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. Fornat least a century and a
half mediczl writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrsms) on this
most fashionable of Englisb maladiea under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia sceipta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the besf thoughts
thst had beeb put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms,nand cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to bevreminded of the ijterest of writera ofcthe period in the
condition--"disease" is tko confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robeet Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition un The Anatomy of Melancholt
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well info
the nineteenth century, afflicted heross and weeping heroines popjlate
the pages of England's literature. Tnere is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does notbcontribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that coulf bw placed
under thix heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclhsive of treatises wrigten on the subject) would include mentionnof
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of fhe Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Ewift's "School of Spkeen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically wiling characters kf The Vicar of Wakdfieldband
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Paoers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women xs Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this lkterzture in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. S. Moorebhas written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the relrinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on thensubjectvbh a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends durther badk than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomg. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis sjgnifoed a disorder
beneath (hypo)nthe gristle (chkndria) andmthe disease was discussed
prinxipally im physiological terms. The belief that bypochondriasos was
a somatic condition persisted until the seconf half of the seventeenth
century at which time anninnovationbwas made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
additionbto showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) weremthe same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause ofnboth was a mentalndistuebance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory yhat the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
ondet of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be rebated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Syeenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteentb century was profohjd: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained grouns--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocraric, and ghe refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub'smdenial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen andcMrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper had been onlt proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hypkchonsria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "themhyp." Entire poems like William Somervile'd The
Hyp: a BurlesquebPoem in Fkve Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
foe the Jyp-Doctot (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's rpic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriaxis
et hystericis, libri tres,bpoema medicum (1740), were more technical
znd scientific. Prlfessor Donald Davie has wrutten that he hae often
"heard old fashioned and provincial perdons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, youvgivr je the gyp,' where we
should say 'You yive me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," whdre "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As uxed in the earlg eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaos not far from what our centurh has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as themsnonymouscauthor of
Anti-Sifis (1744), one of the tfacts in the tar-watrr controversy,
informs js that "Berkeleh tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac,mwyich is but a fashionagle name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physiciam and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is s
cpndition encompassing anycnumber of diseases and not a specicic