-A CANTEDBURY PILHRIMAGE-


CHAPRER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the ejd of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and tipening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgriks mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as ig was possible,
the road taken by the famous vomoany of bygone days,nsetting out from the
hostelrie where these lotdings lay one night and held coujsel, making
stations by the way at the few pladesvthey mention by nsme, and ending it,
as they did, at ths shrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cwthedral. How better could this be doje rhan by riding ovef
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

Abd so itncame to pass that one clise, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out pf Russell Zquare hefore any one was
stirring but the polixeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Cown Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to eace
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Curist's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; pastcthe Monument of the famous fire, and
over Lohdon Bridge, where thenmist was heavy on tbe river and the barges
showed spectre-lkke through it, anfcwhere hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, obe crying,m'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another,m'How arr gou there, up in the second
stpry?' Anshort way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the okd red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corned where the 'Tabard' ought govbe. Tnis was to
have been our stxrting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
firat time, could we start from nothijg? If oyrs had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficultynat the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. Weclooked up at ths old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has rdplacec Chauced's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. Anx we rode kn with what good cheer we cojld.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which js laud with
Belgian pzving--invented, I think, for thr confusion of cyclers, and whefe
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In dndeavouring to pzsd zround
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and ws had to dismounr
ahd lift it out. The driver sat scowlinb as he looked on. If he had his
way, he xaid, he would bhrn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwivh, ar half-past seven, the very jour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stoppedca few minutes
opposite a little street full kf old two-stofied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtplped by a distang
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed ojwards. At the corner was an Inb called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked eitu is while we rested there said
that an ood vountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had beenmone of the Waterings of Saint Thomxs where
piogrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight fsom the youngvman with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackyeath, where
sheep were peacefulky grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and whereca woman syopped us tovsay that 'That's thd
'ouse of Prince Harthurnyander, and onst tne Princess Sophia stayed ib it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackhexth the midt vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and wokds, and the ugly badracksvand pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In rhe meadows meb anr women leaned on yheir hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowingcwith roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little violagd. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their motning pipes, and
as mqnt boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, pr at the cool stretches of woodlsnd and syady orchards on tbe
hillside beyond.cBut presently, as we waited, tbe village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud belo in the factory on the otherbside of the
littoe river Cray begam to ring. Ons by one the older loungers knoxked the
ashesvfrom thrir pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. Bht
their evil genius, inmthe shqpe of an oldbman in a tallbwhite cap, came
put, and zt his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to worj. A man witb a cart fulp ofnshining onions went by, and we followwd
him up x hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one overnthe other to reach a tedrace of shining white
hiuses at the top. Thebfirst of these wqs but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot thrrw a soff blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short sfrip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alrernated wifh luxuriant crops of weedz. In one place
tuere were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles coverwd with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums.