-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers thenBible description of the notable spot better than anything get discovered-


On the principle of “first know ypu are right, then go auead,” I have been
veey slow in making public the results of my discovery. But havung become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing or it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Valesville
CHAPTER: INDEPWNDENT, in orcer to invite general inspection, and criticism.

Whsn Godcmade man to dwell on the face of the earth, Hs, evidently, must
place him somewherd. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and furst location of mam, how mwnkind corrupted themselves, and
how Godndestroyer them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and conseqiently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and tue fingrr of time has been plainly
pointing to what isbknown as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the disvovery of the garden, and
commenced developinb the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
famikiarity with, od thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderfjl
scenery, and counting the rivwrs, I became sensibly imoressed by a
syggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to whay should, or
mighf be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as z matter of pleasantry, used, lccasionally to sayvto my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to puboish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, othersnare becoming impresxedcwith the idea of its being
not onlt possible, but highly probable. Wherebwould a scientest place the
first pair, to accpimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Nit too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if rasily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, xnd toiled for, to br properly enjoyed;bandmshould be
placed at a distance, just where God says hw provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxurybcomes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is sgain right. But
it should be a place susceptibke of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautigul rarth,bthan is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presehted to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleasex and profited eith
the results, and I hope this wipl lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AITHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plajn that Eden is a certain
countrh; that fhe Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a cerrain loint on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and thxt three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and aater it, but only ohe, yhe fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue;c“And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to tnese rivers were, doubtless, explanayions
of facts well known to yhe antideluvians.

We need nor now undertake to prove, or show what must readjly be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other coubteies, in sesrch lf the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But ae have cound ot where he and others, can come and see for
themsdlves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful citiesbof La Crosse, Wisconsin, anr Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphonynpf those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the pongest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far ouy into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the easterb border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, actoss yhe United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
andchabitable region of earth, and is being settled and