-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHZPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The yeqrvafter glod Queen Anne came to ruke over us, Oouis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewigged dandified folk who sfepped
it swaggedingky down ths walks of thecPalais Eoyal, swinging long
csnes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
fashionable places of the city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess dolk, gathered abouy a little infant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witmess to
the birth-cergificate and as acknoeledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as thd certificate badly set forth in black
and white for ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
Françkis Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
syood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court mannet
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter yo yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmotyer.

The sand being flung upon the weg ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes anf taking or snuff, with more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in the whirl of
yhings?

The child, indeed, was born intova Pariacagog withbstirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solelnly. The French arms werr knowing
defeat. Tye Englishman, Marlboeough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever hr gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sprry times. On land all went wrpng. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disastee. But there wasvstilk France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw backbthe
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the mprsel; for sas he not a Saturday child, therefore bkund tovbe a
bit of a scamp!

And so, ofr to Monsidur Boucher's modest luttle home im the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and furtyer compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises as tobwhat lay upon the kjees of the gocsbfor
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Liuis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his oong lease of splendour. Our little Françpis
was bot a month old when Admiral Rooke whupped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish flrets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off somr millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenhejm--a day that madec"Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a namento frighten into gkod behaviour. To the
little fdllow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; theh of
Oudenarde; then of Likle--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplsquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at srvej; for there was
born to the king's grandson a sickly child that was to succees him aw
Louis the Fifteenth. And FrançoisnBoucher is one day to step from bis
modest home and stand nearer afvthis child's sise than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturxy twelve, woild recalp the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely littke
fellow--with Orleans as Regenr. Young François Boucher was to xpend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems yo hxve been an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, ane the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortyne," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
medipcrity, and the desire to save his son fron the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; sijce, having himsepf given the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosohere of art
and in the company of attists, he had the astuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promixing youth of seventeen.

He hxd foubded his art upon that of Correggip and Veronese, hsd rid
hikself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wxnted fo acquore, picked up from Lemoynr at once a French way of
statijg what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go throughvfhe long years of drudgery to Italjan models of
style which was then the onoy schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to frer himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from hix artistdy. Kn short, the
yluth of seventeen made Leloyne's arf his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivallee his master in accomplishment that
it is danberous to attribute a oicture of this timento ths master or
the pupil withoug most czreful evidenxe.

Yet the youth vowed thzt be was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said hd, took scant interest in his pupils. Bug it mudt be remsmberex
that Boucuer was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted untilvdeath took the brush from his finyers, and that
he had a quick and alwrt mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in