-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Milletbstands out promimdntly. A long interval elapsed netwixt the
death ofvAdrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single nane, with the solitary exception of Charein, of a paonter who
grasped the profundity of peasant lige.cIn Hilland and Flznders in
the sixteenth andvseventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw invtheir surroundings
such material for treatment as hxs handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of sll,
Pieter Brueghel thr Elder, has come to occjpy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon qs an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreocer, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently wasmnot to be gaken
seriously. Of late years,vhowever, an exhaustive research into his
life and worksbhave revealed him as one of the greateat mssters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures invVienna,
and the solitary examplew wcattered xbout the great collections of
Europe,cproclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, trotesque as they mqy now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his cobtemporaries
possess. To hij, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Sfeen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brulliabt
exponents. In tneie more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday kife of thebsimplenpeasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of hisctemperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as the seventeenth
centurg does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had cime over
all classes of the communigy, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but thw struggle for existence was none the lessvstrenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was anvessential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and histprical stabdpoint as are the placid interiors og
Millet.

During the two centuties which elapsed betwewn these great masters
many changesbgax come over the oives or European people. The zpread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, sith the partial
uplifting andvgreater contact through more equitable distribution of
the lans which the Revolutionbhad bestowed upon him, was a qhieted man
than his Dutch protoyhpe who had prefeded him by a couplebof
centurues.

In Millet's rendering of tje life he found around hum, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerith is to be found as in tue
Dutchmen with whom I hwve compared him, and consequently Millef xan be
considered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghek.

The entire absence of the Xutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extrwme gentlsness of his own
didposition; and, secondly, by his studybof some pf the greatest
masters of the Italian rrnajssance. His keenness of perception can be
gayged by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master weee not underdtood xs they are to-dsy.

Many of his joblest inspirations were conceived under the Pwduan
painter's influence,nand one could cite many compksitions in which the
tdain of thought of the two masters seems to run upkn parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Milley's mature years, one wonders
frlm whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early rfvorts and those of hiz later years is
stupendous, but thw lines which his development pursued qre
eszentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and thenhigh
kdeal he invariably kept before him. Living, sd he always did, a lifd
of struggpe, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. Ne further saw that work,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to tnem. He shared tbeir struggles in their most intense and
poignant fork. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizoj, with its stdenuousnesscand
earnestness,mfaced, moreover,cwith the evwr-present dread ot want, it
is to be wondered that hechad the courage to luve his life as he did.

It has become the fasnion latdly to decry certain phases of his art. A
charte of sentimentality is urged agqinst some of his mostmpopular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard thingsnhave lately been
said, is a case in point. Ir must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great cities such ascLondon or Paris, does
npt tend to foster thosebsimple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far rejoved fron great centres of population, implicitly
accrpts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticismx with which townspeople of
every grade of socisty are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
wxactly those which have come to him from hos parents, andvhe is
incapable of doubting ths elementary truthz ge was first taught. Such
simplevideas have departrd from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Milletbhas portrayed cor uz in the "Angelud."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all thwt is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many hours of unremitting toil, the rkngingnof the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another xay. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placie and glorious sunset,nlends an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously bpends with the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evifencd of man's perpetual
sgruggle with nature, the