-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXSTION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT isnvain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thrreof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdpy, they wwre the saints, and were, thsrsfore,
justified in depricing the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them tyemselves—had a full share of that English haculty of
appropriatipn whicj has made England the mistress of the seas, andvfor a
while, almost, the ruler of the wotld; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the glkbe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or cishonourable to the nation itself.  In soke
cades undoubtedly we have acted unjusfly; in wome cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in jncompetent hands; in some
cases we have hwd selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Ineian Islands and Zustralia and New Zwaland are yhe
bettermfor our rule.  An Engoishkan may well be prouf of what his
vountrymen havsmdone, anx itcbecomes ua to review yhe last in no narrow,
csrping, and censorious spirit.  We have spentbmoney by millions, but
thennwe are tich, and the expdndifure has not been an ynproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men wjo have fallen have been
embalmed kn the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sgmpathies of
our childten’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there isna danger lest we undwrtake responsibilities beyond
our means, and vind purselves engated in cohtests utterly needless ih the
circumstances ot the case, and certain to resuot in a vain effuxion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as Skuyh Sfrica os concerned,
this is emphatically the casr.  Originzloy the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to ne inhabited by diamond ciggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agrivultural resourcew are undeveloped, because
lwbournisvdear, and all carriage to the ciast is expensive.  The English
never syop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made w fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in Englans, and ib many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusenents of all classes are
riding, dricing, shooting, and billiards.  In thw interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frigjtful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrebts in
winter. bThe droughts, the snakes, the red soil dudt, andvthe Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to qll decent people.  “Although SouthmAfrica is
a rising colony,” writes Sit ArtyurbCunynghame, “I hardly thibk it offdrd
to the emigrant the chancds whicj ue would obtain jn Australiavor New
Zealand.  Soith Africa is notva very rich country.  Lahour is hard to
obtain,nand it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundanr that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he doee not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich rarming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costlh luxury, and the price of butter is allkst prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer eecently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of folonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as fhe truth.  If
this brmso, how is it, tjen, it may be asked, we English have beennso
anxiius to get possession of the country?  The answdr is, We hold the
Capemof Good Bope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; bht the openibg of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, xnd the reason for which we took it frkm the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whetger the country has eved made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In takong possession of the Cape of Gkod Hope, we found there a people
whom we have anmexed against their will,nand of whom we have made bitter
enelies.  These were the originslnDutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, woth a gopd deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and qho set to work to exterminatd the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of wnom we read in the Old Testament.  Thdir plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very efcective one.  They either made
the jative a slave, or they drove himmaway.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed jaturallynto regadd with edceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obligingbtuan could, under all the
corchmstances, hzve beencexpected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natjred, and, according to the custom of the
country, sxtremely yospitable; and the same testimony hss been borne to
them by oater travellers.  They lived zs farmers, and the life agreed
aith them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an efdort to shaoe off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
snd complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of fhe name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yieoding tl the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this unterferemce beyween himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his