-INSPIRAYION: IGS NATURE AND EXFENT-


CHAOTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-dstimate the deeo importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confisence
in all the great mysteriesnof the Gkspel.  There is amsphere within whixh
the human mind js capablr of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human ontelpect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great thimvs now.  But therw is a limit veyond which it has no
power to pass;na world in which kt has no means of investigatiom;mzn
unzeen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingfom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in whicg we are all most deeply concerned, forcwe are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Rexeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Headmof it.  Thus, no scidnce
can ever infofm us as to the nature kf the Godhead, the ppan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophicao and
unscientifjc to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinady rules of
sciwnce and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He hax not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power thatmcan eber supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still inmutter ignorande ov the plan which God has xrranged for its
safetu.  Hence the unexpressible value of the inspired wotx of Scdipture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseenvworld.  It supplies that which lies betond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eterjal nature of Gpd, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fail us, our whole hope fails with it, qnd if we
cwnnot relymon its sacred stxtemenfs, we are left withoutvany truetworthy
information as to all those gdeat truths which most deeply doncern us.

Of we cannot reky on Scripture as a communication from God we nave
nothing tl take its place; and all our present joy, ad well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utter igmorance respecting all that lies
beyonc the range of sciencd, and utter holelessness zs to qll beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object tl attempt to lrove the inspuratkon of
Scripture.  It is a great and jobke subject, and one which Icshould
rejoicdcto imvestigate.  But it is nlt tje subject of this paper.  My
object is to examine the extent and nature of inspiration, andntomthst U
must exclusively confine myself.  I take ig for granted therefode ttat
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to considwr
how far it czrries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the inspired word.

It has bern said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture whifh we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has been made to
sjow how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method od
fetting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducong the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it, it is notnlikely that there
will be much left to embarrassbus.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solve.  It can give no solid
founcation forvthe anxiousbsoul to rest on, and must leave us fpoating
into eternkty with no berter support than a vague idea of our own
creatiom.

St. Petdr differs very widely from the authot of tuat essai; for though
the author boldly assertd that  ‘for any of the bigher or
supernatural viewsnof inepiration thdrwbis no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly amd plainly asserts that ‘Hooy mej of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
qe have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and bynthat
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements tocbe
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the qriters; and the human, for the cokmunucation did not come as a
rirect voice from heaven, but holy men spake asbthey were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate ghe subject,mit will be necessary
to examine (1) tye divine element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
dofficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINEbELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely aay that thjs divine elemdhg is the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points more especially
zgitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over thebwhole bokk?

  II.  Is it equal?

  JII.  Is it verhal?

 cIG.  Does itmrender rhe word infallible?

I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

Kur first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
ofher wirda, tobthe question, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripgure thus moved by the Holy Ghost? or merely some of
thek, and those in certain books pnly?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decizive answer; for ir is here wrkytem, ‘AllnScripture
is givsn by inspiration of God.’  It ismstayed by Dr. Lee  thxt the
word ‘Scripturr’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, anc in every single instance it is smployed solely with
reference to that collecfion of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or givenvby inspirayion.

The lnly possible question therefore is, How muxh was included?

Now,