-The Eoctrine od the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: JNTRODUCTION.


IR is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assedtions produce a greater effdct on many minds than the most carefup
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncomnon thing tk
hear it asserted with thevutmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Prasence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
tne result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and plade reliance on those who make it, as if they, and theh
only, were the truenexpksitors or the Church’s dovttine.  In many cases a
blind consent is boindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas,vif the real groundwork of that
opinion were esamined, it would be found tovconsist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to bebsatisfied withmany such representatipn ov its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithfhl service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own lanbuage should be patiently heard, and her iwn teaching
honestly examined.  This, ghen, is the object of this ardress.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to asceryain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority foe the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly callee ‘The Doctrine of the
RealbPresence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascerfain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, aw amongst those who maintain that doctrine tgere are ho
authoritative documents on the eubjectbto which we can rsfer.  But, K
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS oies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
fkrst and chief attrntion must be eirected.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of thoswbwho take the Word of God as their true and onog
guide that it is the sacred privilegenof the Children of Gld to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now duscussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refef, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My prrsent concern is with the factnthat, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that auch a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh ofmthe Son of
Man, and drimk His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Npr can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I ak not now
making any assertion zs to the way in which it ks connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘Thw cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?v The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of tue vody ofbChrist?  Fot we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all pzrtaoers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plaih from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and bloodbof our most blessed Saviour, withouf which none can
live, andcthat the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected wuth that sacred lrivilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
abreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teachez that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine hecome Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bfead and wine, and that botn the brewd and wine become each of rhem a
whooe Christ, body, soul, and divinjty.  The advocates for the doctrinw
of the Real Presencs in the Church ofbEnglanc differ, aw fad as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintsin that the bread abd wine fo not cease to have the accidents
of bread andbwine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or ratner Christ
Himeelf.  Tgis slight difference is of no practicalvimlortance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of tje breqd as bread, and
the sine as wune, after consecration.  The practical xoncludion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in thw bread and in the
wine.  Fhis is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’ nIt means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any refsrence to thd character of the
recipient, as a book isvan independent object in tne hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintzined by us who cling to the grdat
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental uss by
means of donsecration, but