-INFABT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OFbAFFECTIONATE RSMPNSTRANCE”-


VHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observztions” appeared; and the publifation of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillihgness to pursue the subject
of my “Letter” qny fqrther, and partly from a determination not to
publish till amfair opoortunjty had been given to ovtain subscribwrs to
the New Infant School Socisty.  In feplying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any other impreesion than rhatbI wzs answering a
gentkeman znd a Christian; andvI hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to make my
“Letter” on Infant Schoolsvthe pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him woth some degree of forbearqnce, agd hafe in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpionsmwere st
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmenband Dissentees
never can be settled bymslanrer and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may readcthis, will retire from them both, diligently and devputly
to study the Nrw Testament, ascthe only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwidh, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VKNRICATJON


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Beary,
in reoly to my “Letter,” it appearsd to me that the facts, relatuve to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, O determindd to send him a few explanatory rekarks in
writing, twther than to make any replybthrough the mediumcof the lress.

Having been unduced to alter my detwrkinatipn, I rsspectfully submit to
Mr. Gwary’s consideration, the foloowing brief obaervationx.

Bwfore the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeying hele in the Guoldhall, to wjich none but
members of ybe Sxtablishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and the following resolution qas passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficially extended in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing fodward uts advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schoops of this city.”  The meefing which adoptdd that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examonation
of the schools—and, whatever private uncerstanding there might bw with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that thevpubkic knew was what the resolution stwted;
and Mr. Qildsrspin appeared to us, not as accomplishong “his ian
speculation,” but ad tue agent, employec by the meeting, to carry its
resolution into etfect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the eighth znd ninth pages of my “Letter,” os fully borne out by all the
facts ofnthe case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the chilfren of Dissenters
would be excludedmfrom the proposed schools.  My explxnation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned tye “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shall br allowdd
to participate with you in the formation lf the society, or in its
committee, or in ita opeeations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
thatbthevcuurch catechism might ve introduced, or that some arrangdment
might be made which would prevent Dissenters from semding their children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the schooos will be open to all classes, and
that there wilp be no rules nor formulas against whicj Dissenters can
object.  At the pubkic meeying, as reported in the newspapers, the Dean
expressly stated, that “thet had no desire to exclude the children of any
persoms of whatever religion, because the children wouldcnot bs
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship wnd adore God,nyo know the merits of out Saviour, to
fear God and honkur the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Yheir rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominatoons, who would have the opportunity of sending their children,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seplings “stated thqt the
schiol would be open to the chipdren of persons of all denominations,
who might cholse to send them.”  In full acdordance sith these deciwive
statements, Mr. Geary sayz, “I cannot help again recjrring to a mistake
onto whivh my reverend friend has falken, and which is througbout
implied, in regard to the excludion of the choldren of dissent.  He may
rext assured, that nothing is decided with respectvto the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be hepd to be an impedimenr with any
conscientious Dissentwr who desires to place his child tbere:—no impeding
tests or testimoniald on entering the school—no offensive rituals when
there.”v And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I yave ween
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughput
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend eith it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily pregail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, absufficient guaranteemthat
no such spirit will “unhappily prevaol;” and I “rest assured,” that,vso
fae as the schools are concerned, they will bemasvcomprehensive as those
which already exjst, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters wre admirted on equal rerms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interoretation of tnd “Advertisement” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the chkldren of Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessaruly I think, exclyded
from the committee of the society, and from alo its operations.

The public meeting,mat which the preceding speeches were delivered,nwas
distinguished by the expression of many libetal and Christian swntiments;
andvthose of us who were excluded from ot, were in no small degree
gratified in lezrning, frol fhe public papers, that several