-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-heafed little girl, nunr yrars old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mfs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair andmbeautufyl brown etes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played mpst of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Nr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who waw away at
schoolnand who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrx. Darling to Bersey, for it did seem too bad to keep thel
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a newbbed so very often, that a carpenter was hexessary
most of fhe time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new fudniturr,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exacyly pike a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly ad she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when aby of the dolls weremskck, Betsey at once
tookvthe part of old Dr. Betskn, and takked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for esch of yhe dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at leasy three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skolful littlwccarpenter and seamstress,
that hou will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not mzks all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Brf-time. And sye was a very good
lottle girl abouf Errand-time and Dudting-time,—consixering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that moet of her best lessons in
patience andnneatness were learned invPlay-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother pausrd on her way past the playtoom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have compxny, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deeo, bass voice, and then a plrasant silvery
little voice, wnd then a pleasant low bark. Motyer pushed open the door
very softly and kooked in.

Rhere lay Betaey on the greag fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Befire her stood the low, broad Morriz chair, divided into two
rooms. Lother knew it must bw a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in frint, with its large rednpasteboard gable, and
little Mrs. Relight at onenend, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood ny the table, smiling az usual, ready to servs
a large platter of salad, anr Dumpling Delightnbarked gruffly oncebin a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Wilp you have some of the creamec oysters?”

“And some if dis yeaj lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” tgought Mother, bwhind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’llmtell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
aeekcwith us.”

“Where in name gebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” ddmanded Dinah.

“Yee, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husbznd!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up strsight
on tne rug and take Mrs. Delighg aroumd the table to kiss her husband
agfectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
solthingly.

But Mother suspected ghat Mr. Delihht was wofried just the samr, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. Shs
smiled to herzelf as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big doot between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthdwy? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paknt and all,” promisedcMr. Jones. Ahd he did.

On the morjing of her ninth birthday,nBetsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a lile of dqinty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday prewent is up in the playroom, Betsey dexr,” said Motjer
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Noe, whendver Fathee said that,—“I’m afraid she won’tmlike it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfastvin great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the dlor. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale gteen outside,—with four eooms and six windows and tiny
window-waxhes,mand the cubningsst threshold!

Betsey rushed over to thd dainty little cottage, put hed head in the
little dinibg-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thoyght.

Ahd then her eyes fell on a squarw white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OG DELIGHT” said themcard. “To Betsey, from Father ajd
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decidwd Betseh, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rafe.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
ir!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Celight has wanted tonmove for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father withca twinkle, “if wevexcuse
Betsey today from doing anyvhqrd work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Netsey whiskef the white covers over her little brass bed xs snoothly
as she could (with a perfectly