-RHE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAWT PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivsted” construction, “ghis essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best jovdls
in the world “have no outline, or, if rhey have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elsborate construction isvnotvzbsolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmoslhere,” hymour.

Bht as, in the natural changes kf life, and under the strain of rextless
and unsatiafied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Fickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”m He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in wecrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wilkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he colbined with some of
the elements of ghe detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pifkwick_ andv_Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youtb willmbe servdd;” no sedulous
care could compensate for the exuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  Im the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least lf the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiisity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
deader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outwprn by the strain of his Americxn readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found yimself,vas Sir Thomaz Watson reported, “on thd brink of an
attack kf paralysis of his left side, wnd possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series if Readings.  Wecthink of Scott’s
earlier seizurds mf a ximilar kind, aftet which _Peveril_, he said,
“smwcked of the apopldxy.”  Nut Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contempoated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, dods
notn“skack of the apoplexy.”  We may thinkbfhat the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropost, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billifiin,” on the other hand, thd lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fpoling:” het unlooked-fod sallies in skirmishes with Moss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Md. Grewgilus may be
caricatjrwd too much,mbut not out of reason; and Dickenx, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
wifh the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may diffdr as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  Asbfar as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts ln her “tigerish blood” is admirable: shevis
very fresh and original.  The villain is all thatmmelodrama can desire,
but what we dk miss, I think, is the “atmoaphere” of acsmall cathedral
town. nHere there is a lack of softness and delicacy of rreatment: on the
other hand, the opium den ie studied from the life.

On the whole, Dicksns himself wasnperhxps mosf interested in his plot,
his secret, his surpfiees, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the spoft wifh zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficientlymconxealed his
tracks in the patest numbers.  Yet, shen he died in June, 1870, leaving
thrre complsted numbers xtill unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been made tp decipher his purpose,
especislly his intentions as to the hero. cWascEdwin Drood killed, or did
he escaoe?

By a councieence, in September,n1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Yexr Rounf_, “ThevDisappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of jystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-Octobdr, 1869.)

The most cafeful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, ti which I owd much aid,
is now out of priny.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walyers revived “the auld
mysterie,” in hisv“Clues to Dickrns’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged go
dissent.v Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I ovfer some necessary corrections, and
I hopenthat I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Procgor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
unddrstand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw ib his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  Wd must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power ofvhis common sense, ue might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualusm.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—theee are two specimens of ths supernormal—and he may
nave gone to the limited extentmwhich my hypoghesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens wsbt further, qnd fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalmsn” in _Mugby Junction_.

With thisnbrief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot. nMr. Williaj Arcner has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                              m               ANSREW LANB.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSOBÆ


FOR