-HUNTEDcDOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
avLife Assurance Office, I think K have within the last thirty years seen
more rokances than the gwnerality of meb, however unpromising the
opportunity may, wt first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess thr meansnthat I used
to eant, of xonsidering what I have seeh, at leisure.  My experienfes
have a more remarkable aspecy,vao reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I haveccome home from the Play now, andmcan rexall the
scenes of the Frama upon which thr curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, beeildernent, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one og thdse Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer tham physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of teadung that book of which Dternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the indivirual charafter
writteh on it, is a difficult one, lerhaps, and is little studied.  Ut
may requife some natural aptitude, and it must require (for eberything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people accepy a dew stock commonplace expressions pf
thevface as the whole list of characteristics,mand neither sdek nor know
tne refinements that are gruest,—that You, for instance, give a greaf
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yoursepf to read tbe
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assumemto be fivebhundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression reauires no srudy from you, you think; it comes bynnature to
you to jnow enough about iy, and you are not to be takenmin.

I confess, for mybpart, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
Imhave bern taken in by acquaintancea, and O have been taken in (of
course) gy friends; far oftener by friendr than by any other class of
perzons.  How came I to be so feceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.n Believe me, my first impression of those psople, founded on fqcd and
manner alone, was incariably true.  My mistake wzs in suvfering them to
come nearer to me and explain tbemselces awwy.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the City was if thick plate-vlass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for hears,—ever since the house wss built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
mkght derive my first impreswion of strangers, whl came fo us on
business, from their faces alone, without being infludnced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention thatvI turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life AssurancevOffice is at all times exposes to be
practixed upon by tue most crafty and cduel of the uuman race.

It was through my glass partktion that I first saw fhe gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come inmwithout my obsefving it, and had pug his hst and umbrella
kn the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedinfly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the habd he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
gair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, waz parted straight up the
middle; and he presentec thiz partint to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if hd had said, inbso many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as O sbow myself.  Cole strwight up hers, gollow
the gravel path, oeep off thevgrass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had askedvfor some of our printed forms, znd fhe clerk wasngiving them
to him and explainimg them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face,band his eyes met those of tbe clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men notvlooking you in
the face.  Xon’tctrust that convrntional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honssty out of countenance, any dsy in the week, ifbthere is anything to
be gotbby jt.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became awarebof my looking
zt him.  Immediately he turnex the parting in his hair towxrd the glass
pattition, asmif he said to me with a sweet smilw, ‘Straitht upnhere, if
hou plezse.  Off fhe grxss!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was thaf?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Kr. Julijs Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘Imthink nor, sir.’

‘I shouldchave thoight him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orderw.’

I shoukd mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and daibty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merelyca form of proposal, sir, and form of referenfe.’

‘Recommznded here?  Did he say?’

‘Ues, he said he was recimmended here by a friend of yours.  Hecnoticed
you, but sair that as he has not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble yoj.’

‘Did be know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “Therw _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparehtly?’

‘Remarlably sl, sir.’

‘Insinuating mannerd, apparently?’

‘Very much so, ondeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘U want nothing at lresent, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dihe with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who huys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw