-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: THE MIGRATION TO PARIS


How frequently has it happened that the first years in the life of a
genius have been employed in labour quite different from that to which
they should have been directed. Such a state of affairs the more often
occurs when the sense of duty has been strong enough to overcome
temporarily the inclination to pursue the natural bent. In the case of
Millet, however, the early years which he devoted to the farm and its
pursuits were by no means wasted. It is on record that he became very
proficient in the various duties in which he was engaged, but at the
same time we can be quite sure that his extraordinary faculties of
observation were constantly being brought into play, and the fruits of
his observations are to be seen in the pictures of his mature period.

A considerable portion of his spare time was taken up with drawing,
not only the persons and objects he found around him, but also
subjects suggested to him by the books he was in the habit of reading.

His family, so far from throwing any obstacles in his way, encouraged
him. In fact it was his father who took him first to Cherbourg in
order to show a painter of that town, named Mouchel, the early
products of his son's genius. The decision at which Millet père had
arrived was prompted by a drawing in charcoal of an old peasant
walking along the road, which had struck him forcibly as being a work
of extraordinary merit. It says much for Mouchel's breadth of mind
that he was equally impressed with the drawings. A man who had been
brought up in the school of David, and who had lived in one of the
most reactionary periods of French art, was hardly to be expected to
take kindly to a style so diametrically opposed to all the traditions
into which he himself had been inculcated; certainly the young
Millet, who had now arrived at the age of eighteen, had not developed
the extraordinary freedom which his works of ten years later
demonstrate. But there was sufficient originality even in his early
drawings to call forth condemnation from a man who had been so
saturated with the teaching of David.

He prevailed upon Millet to leave his son with him, and set him to
work to copy many well-known works of art which he brought before his
pupil by means of engravings. Two months were spent in this way when
news reached Millet that his father had been seized with sudden
illness, and he was obliged in the circumstances to return to
Gréville. He arrived to find the old man unconscious, and very shortly
afterwards he died.

This misfortune awoke in Millet a sense of duty which compelled him to
desert his studies in Cherbourg and superintend the management of the
farm. For some time he devoted himself entirely to his new duties, but
the struggle betwixt duty and genius continued; he gave himself to his
work with all the energy at his disposal, but his thoughts were ever
wandering to his art.

Added to his own inclinations, his grandmother, who perceived his
extraordinary gifts, strongly persuaded him to devote his attention
entirely to art, and consequently after some little time he decided to
return to Cherbourg. Here he entered the studio of M. Langlois, an
artist whose reputation in the town was considerable. Again in this
worthy man he came in contact with a painter who had been brought up
entirely under classical influence. Langlois, who had in his early
days been a pupil of Gros, had absorbed the classical tradition to
such an extent as to be incapable of appreciating any other style. He
appears to have endeavoured to mould Millet in his own method rather
than develop the latent genius which the latter possessed. The
incompatibility of these two men speedily caused the younger to strike
out in his own way. He saw more good in frequenting the museums and
making copies of such works as appealed to him than in listening to
the advice of his teacher. All this occurred, however, without any
breach of friendship occurring. On the contrary, Langlois, after
perceiving the futility of inducing his pupil to follow in his
footsteps, did all he could to advance his interests.

By means of his influence some of Millet's drawings were brought
before the Municipal Council, and Langlois suggested that Millet
should be sent to Paris in order to further his development, and that
the Council should set aside a modest pension to meet his requirements
in that city. The discussion appears to have been very prolonged, and
upon the question being put to a vote it was only carried by means of
the casting vote of the mayor. Four hundred francs was at first
allotted to him in this way, which was further increased shortly
afterwards to six hundred. Such encouragement, meagre though it was,
was sufficient to give him a foothold in the metropolis. He left
Cherbourg in January 1837, on a cold and raw day, the snow falling
heavily throughout the entire journey, and arrived in Paris in a very
disheartened condition. The miserable weather, coupled with the long
journey in which he had had time to think of the small sum which lay
between him and starvation, going to a city which he had never seen
before, had all served to work upon his nerves, and he entered the
great city sick at heart and very despondent.

One of the first visits he made after he was somewhat settled down in
Paris was to the Louvre. Here he was brought into contact for the
first time with many masters, who were to mould his yet plastic
temperament into the form which enabled him to give to the world, in
later years, so many masterpieces. As I have said before, it was
Mantegna who first captivated him, and the influence of the mighty
Paduan was never finally to be shaken off. Michel Angelo awed him with
his sublimity; his classical severity tempered with intense humanism,
his masculine strength, were bound to have their effect upon so
serious a character as Millet. Strange as it may seem to those who are
but superficially acquainted with his art, and are only too apt to
judge him by the influence he has had upon modern French painting, he
was fascinated with the antique. The traditions of Phidias and
Praxiteles, in the form in which they had been transmitted through the
greatest minds of the Renaissance, were ever the factors which guided
him throughout his career. It was this same spirit which impelled his
fervid admiration for Nicolas Poussin, a master who to-day is sadly
underrated and but little understood. It was the mysteries of line,
the wonders of pose and composition rather than the magic of colour
which appealed to him. He had a profound admiration for the glowing
canvases of Titian and Rubens, but he could never overlook entirely
their defects of drawing or, in the case of Rubens, the tendency to
vulgarity. From his remarks in after years it would appear that he was
baffled with the mysticisms of Velazquez and Rembrandt; pure painting
itself could never hold him. He needed to grasp the message which lay
behind it before he felt fully taken into the confidence of the
painter; and as the minds of the Dutchman and the Spaniard ran in
quite different channels to his own, they spoke with a language he
never understood. That he had a perceptive and critically independent
mind may be gauged from his enthusiasm for Delacroix, whose work he
encountered for the first time at the Luxembourg.

During this period of study he was carefully considering under what
master he should place himself. His choice unhappily fell upon
Delaroche. To any one acquainted with the work of the latter master,
a more unsuitable selection could not have been made. Delaroche and
the painters who surrounded him can be appropriately described as
constituting the back-wash of the Empire style, which had reached its
climax with David. His subjects were always treated with academic
reserve. No pyrotechnics were permitted; on the contrary, an
everlasting and mistaken striving for finish was encouraged:
originality was sternly suppressed. To paint human life as it really
was, was too vulgar for any of the painters of this time. They held
the public taste enslaved for years. An innovator such as Millet was
destined to become found his position almost untenable. The band of
critics and painters formed a monopoly which it seemed almost
impossible to break down, and it was only after years of bitter and
determined struggle that the school of nature finally routed its
opponent.

Delaroche doubtlessly found the peasant painter a little rude both in
his person and in his ideas about art. He paid but little attention to
the young man who had placed himself in his hands, and devoted all his
time to students who were more amenable to his influence. A
temperament so sensitive as Millet's was bound to notice this
neglect, and consequently after a time he became so discouraged that
he ceased to frequent Delaroche's studio. Another very good reason for
this action was the lack of resources to continue his payments. Even
during the time he had been with Delaroche he lost no opportunity of
turning a few honest francs by painting the portraits of any who could
be got to sit to him. Delaroche, however, had a more kindly heart than
Millet imagined. He seems to have found out the real distress of the
young artist, and to have assisted him pecuniarily in many ways, and
there is no doubt that he appreciated the talent of the young Norman
much more than he cared to own. Many of his remarks on record would
serve to show that Delaroche already felt that his pupil was destined
to be one of the leaders of the movement which was finally to
overthrow his own style, and doubtlessly felt a great admiration for a
man who had the courage and strength to swim against rather than with
the current.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the propellers began revolving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, there spreads out
before him at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score or more of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors to hold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from being made the objects of the sport, and
passengers of especial prominence have often been treated to a bath in
a tub of cold water or had their faces lathered with a broom as a
shaving brush while a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

A naval lieutenant on the battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one of the court ladies in London,
states that Napoleon offered the sailors four hundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shaved with a rough iron hoop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for September, 1889.

We reached the line on Thursday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having lost a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagine the water of Manila Bay to be as tranquil as a lake
should conclusions be drawn from its almost landlocked position. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of its waters; and a breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet and take on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
proper development of the city's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, one by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and then leaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass that each of us, ladies and all, in
succession went through with this mid-air acrobatic performance
without serious accident is a matter of profound wonder; but we did,
and the launches when loaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mouth of the Pasig River. At the wharf we were informally introduced
to a crowd of curious natives. The men wore hat, shirt, and pants, and
some of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort of low-necked body with
great wide sleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at both bottom and top, the upper end not being belted or
tied, but just drawn tightly around the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under the part already wrapped
around the body. The long, black, glossy hair of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, in many cases reaching below the hips--heads
of hair that almost any lady would be proud to own. Many of the women
had in their mouths long poorly-made cigars that were wrapped and tied
with small white threads to hold them together while the lady owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landing was in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when we arose to dress was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of the feeling
added no little to the discomfort of the situation.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distant islands that
he had named for his King Philip, built the city of Manila, he modeled
it after the mediaeval towns of his European home. And it is well that
he did so, for, if we give credence to the city's history, its early
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention the sea-rovers
of those early times who paid their piratical respects to the town,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the city on two separate
occasions from bands of Moros sweeping northward from the southern
islands. So Manila consists of two parts, the city "intra muros" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the morning following our landing that I first stood upon
the old stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old city and the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the tower of a neighboring ecclesia
when I purposely took this station that I might see the current of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At short intervals along the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of well-shaped American policemen in neat Khaki
uniforms and russet leather leggins. Thousands of pedestrians were
pouring across the bridge in a ceaseless stream. Between the two lines
of pedestrians moved in opposite directions two lines of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopolitan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chemists, Spanish merchants,
foreign consuls, officers and privates of the American army, seamen
from foreign warships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers to almost naked coolies trotting
along with burdens swung over their shoulders. There were Japanese,
and East India merchants from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finally, all
classes and conditions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
seventeen separate branches of the race,--each individual in this
wonderful stream following the channel of his own necessities.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream below the bridge were
inter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one could
almost have stepped from one to another. Into every nook and corner
between the steamers were crowded small odd looking boats loaded with
native produce over which the owners kept up an incessant chatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our stations. One may well imagine our consternation on awaking one
morning about the end of the second week to find the following notice
posted throughout all our quarters:
    All teachers not assigned to the city of Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
        a. One bed, or folding cot,
        b. One oil stove,
        c. One lamp,
        d. Enough supplies of all kinds sufficient for six months,
        e. Pots, pans, kettles, etc.
It is needless to say that positions in Manila and Iloilo were now at
a premium.

Was it possible that teachers were to be sent to places where even the
necessaries of life could not be obtained! Was it possible that many
would be sent to places so remote that for six months no fresh
supplies could be gotten! A mass meeting was held at once, and a
committee was appointed to send a cablegram to the Associated Press
petitioning aid from the American people at large. Realizing what
consternation would be created throughout the United States by such a
message, two of the teachers leaped into a carriage at the close of
the meeting and a few moments later were closeted with the chief
executive of the department. As a result the committee was persuaded
not to send the cablegram to the Associated Press until by courtesy it
had been sent to the President. Of course, this diplomatic move tided
affairs over and the teachers who had flatly refused to budge from
Manila now agreed to go on to their stations, being assured that
whatever action was best would be taken.

The day had come when we must separate. We were to enter an untried
and an unknown field. It was fitting that we have a final joyous
meeting, so the best orchestra in the archipelago was engaged and we
"chased the hours with flying feet" until dawn so that whatever might
come to us in that unknown future upon which we were entering each
would hold in pleasant memory our last evening together.


CHAPTER: Second Day - Oh, what a Fall!


There was a little more stir in the place the next morning, but it was
because it was filled with tramps, who were wisely taking advantage of the
early coolness and hurrying on their way. But when we turned off the High
Street the town was as still in the glare of day as it had been in the
late twilight. The high brick walls of the private gardens might have
enclosed dwelling-places of the dead rather than of the living, for not a
sound came over them. The little pointed houses might have been sepulchres
for all the signs of life they gave. The whole town, instead of one little
street, should be called Tranquil Place. It seemed very characteristic
that the Cathedral should be closed, and this at the season when the
tourist is abroad in the land. It was being cleaned, an old man told us.

We looked through the iron railing of the door into the nave, and at the
marble floor, and the tall, white, rounded arches. 'It's like looking down
the throat of Old Time!' Mr. Grewgious thought when he stood there. At
the farther end by the chancel steps a charwoman was at work on bended
knees. By her side was one small bucket. Here, truly, was a Liliputian set
to do the work of Brobdignag. At that rate it is probable visitors were
shut out for many months.

After we had looked at the 'Bull,' which still reminds the public by a
sign of the good beds enjoyed by Mr. Pickwick and his friends, at the Town
Hall where Pip was apprenticed, at the many-gabled, lattice-windowed house
in which Rosa Bud bloomed into young ladyhood, and were standing in front
of the 'Six Poor Travellers'' lodging-place, reading the inscription over
the door, and wondering who were the proctors classed with rogues who
could not rest within, a benevolent Englishman passing that way fell upon
us. He was a worthy fellow-citizen of Richard Watts. Seeing we were
strangers, he, without waiting to be asked, bestowed upon us the charity
of information.

'Do you know what a Proctor is, Sir?' he asked, addressing himself to J.,
who meekly, as befits one receiving alms, said that he did not. 'No! Well,
then, I will tell you. It is a proc-u-ra-tor,--one who collects Peter's
pence for the Pope, Sir. Richard Watts lived in the sixteenth century,
when Protestantism made people feel bitterly, Sir, and he would have no
friends of the Pope beneath his roof. Proc-u-ra-tor! That's what a Proctor
is, Sir.'

He had disappeared around the curve of the street before we had finished
thanking him. As the information was new to us, I, with the common belief
that others must be as ignorant as myself, now imitate his benevolence,
and here bestow it in alms upon whoever may be in need of it.

It was one o'clock when we mounted our tricycle and set out once more for
Canterbury. The sky was still unclouded and the day warm, but a good
breeze was blowing, and we were fresh for our ride. The streets of Chatham
were as busy as those of Rochester were idle, and blocked with waggons, so
that we had to fall in line and go at snail's pace. Once, with a sudden
halt, we were brought so near a horse just in front, that my foot knocked
against his leg; but he bore the blow stoically, as if he were used to
Chatham streets. An American circus was about to start out on its grand
street parade, and children hung about corners and out of windows. At the
foot of the hill outside the town, and marked 'Dangerous' by the National
Cyclists' Union, for the benefit of cyclers, two very small boys offered
to 'Push it up, Sir!' but as it looked as if it would push them down, we
declined. At the top we met a cycler on his way from Canterbury, and he
gave us evil tidings of the road. It became worse with every mile, he
said, and it was heavy and hilly, and the dust was enough to stifle one.

To this last statement his appearance bore good testimony.

But at first we found it fair enough. From Chatham to Sittingbourne our
journey was one of unmixed pleasure. The wheels went easily, and the wind
blew on our backs. Now we passed on our right a vast treeless expanse,
divided into squares of green, and golden, and brown, all shining softly
in the sunlight, with here and there a windmill; but to the left we could
see far below us the white line of the river winding between the flat
grey marshes, where in Pip's day the escaped convicts prowled. Again we
wheeled through small, sleepy villages, with church and tower half hidden
in clumps of trees, and with red oasts, whose crooked cowls loomed up over
the chimney-pots of the low cottages: for we had come to the hop country,
and at every step the land of Kent grew fairer. Beyond Rainham the road
lay between hop-gardens, as they are appropriately called, and
cherry-orchards. In places the vines formed tall, shady hedges; in others
the gardens were shut in by bare poles hung with coarse brown cloth, to
defy the wind and the depredations of small boys, and other destructive
animals: but the prettiest fields were those which were in no way hedged
about, so that we could look down the long, narrow, green aisles, which
seemed to lead to fields of light beyond. The vines twisted lovingly up
the poles, which in many places bent beneath masses of green fruit, or
else the topmost shoots crossed and intertwined from one pole to another,
and the whole field was woven into a large arbour. Where the sunlight fell
upon the green clusters it turned them to pure gold, and the leaves,
blowing gently to and fro, seemed to rejoice in their great beauty. The
cherry-orchards were so pretty and trim that I wondered if, like the
hop-fields, they were not sometimes called gardens. The trees had been
long stripped of their fruit, but their branches were well covered with
cool green leaves, and their shadows met on the grass beneath. There was
one in particular, before which we rested. Sheep were browsing placidly on
the downy turf, and when we looked low down between the trees we could see
the shining white river far in the distance. I half expected to hear a
new Daphnis and Menalcas singing their pastorals in gentle rivalry.

We met few people. The tramps who come down to Kent for the hop-picking
turn off from Rochester to go to Maidstone, where the largest hop-fields
are, and where there is more chance for them to be hired; but a
comparatively small number go on to Canterbury. Some cyclers were making
the most of the fine day. As we sat idly between the hop-gardens three
passed us. Two rode a tandem; the third, a bicycle; but they were of the
time-making species, for whom the only beauty of a ride is that of speed.

Looking at them, and then at the sheep in a field beyond, I thought the
latter were having the best of it. A little further on we met a party of
three Frenchmen. One rode ahead on a bicycle, the two others followed on a
tandem like ours. One of the latter, when he saw us, called out to the
bicycler, 'C'est bon d'aller comme ça!' I suppose he thought we should
not understand him, and if we did--well, ought not a Frenchman always to
be gallant?

We rode on with light hearts. An eternity of wheeling through such perfect
country and in such soft sunshine would, we thought, be the true earthly
paradise. We were at peace with ourselves and with all mankind, and J.
even went so far as to tell me I had never ridden so well!

It was, then, in a happy frame of mind, that we reached the inn at
Sittingbourne. It was an unassuming place, but quiet and clean; the bar
was on one side of the hall, the coffee-room on the other. The latter was
empty, and the landlady, after laying the cloth for our bread and cheese
and shandy-gaff--of all drinks the most refreshing to the cycler--left us
alone to study this printed notice, which hung in a frame over the door:--
  'Call frequently,
  Drink moderately,
  Pay honourably,
  Be good company,
  Part friendly,
  Go home quietly.'

We soon had the opportunity of putting into practice one clause of this
advice, for the door was suddenly burst open, and a short man with a bald
head, who wore the Cyclists' Touring Club uniform, rushed in.

'Are you the lady and gentleman that came on the tandem?' he asked, before
he was quite in the room.

We said we were.

'I don't like tandems, do you?' he continued, fiercely, as if he were
daring us to differ from him. He seemed to think we had come there that he
might tell us his grievances; which he did, with much elaboration, while
we ate our lunch. He and his wife had been down to Margate from London,
and were now on their way back, he said. They had made the trip on a
tandem; it was the first time he had ridden one, and it would be the last,
for he didn't like tandems--they were horrid things! Did we like tandems?

To avoid repetition, I may here mention that this expression of dislike,
together with the query as to our opinion, was the refrain to everything
he said. It was always given with the same interest and emphasis as if it
were an entirely original remark. The only variation he made was by
sometimes beginning with the statement, and at others with the question.

He explained the reasons for his dislike. The principal was, that the
people one met on the roads always insulted riders on a tandem. Why, he
had been off his machine a dozen times that morning, fighting men who had
been chaffing him! I thought, with a shudder, of the crowd of hucksters
J. would have had to fight by London Bridge, had he been of the same mind.

Then, the next objection was, that he had to sit behind his wife--she had
to steer, and he would not be surprised if he were seriously injured, or
even killed, before he got back to London. Women were heedless things, and
easily frightened. His wife, who had joined us a few minutes before, here
grew angry, and a slight skirmish of words followed between them: she
reminded him of the dangers they had escaped through her nerve and
skill; he recalled the dangers into which they had run owing to her
thoughtlessness and timidity. But, just at this point of the discussion J.
took out his watch. At sight of it the little man forgot his anger to
pounce upon it, with never as much as 'An it please you!' Then, looking up
in triumph, he exclaimed, 'I knew it! it's an American watch! They know
how to make watches over there, but they're ruining our trade.' Then he
explained that he was a London watchmaker, and he pulled out of his pocket
a large substantial specimen of his workmanship.

The talk now turning upon America, we told him, in answer to his
inquiries, that we were Americans.

'From Canada?' his wife asked.

'Oh, no!' I answered; 'from Philadelphia.'

'Dear me!' the watchmaker said; 'then you're real Americans! But you
speak English very well!'

'Yes,' J. admitted, modestly. 'But then, you know, English is sometimes
spoken in our part of the world!'

All this made the fierce little cycler very friendly, and he next wanted
to know where we were going.

'To Canterbury,' we said.

'To Canterbury!' he cried; and then, to give greater force to his words,
he came and stood directly in front of us on the other side of the table.

'To Canterbury! Well, then, my advice to you is, if you have no other
object than pleasure, don't go! No, don't you go! I've been there, and I
know what I say. It's a rotten place. There's nothing in it but an old
cathedral and a lot of old houses and churches, and they charged me
sixpence for keeping my tandem one night. I don't like tandems-horrid
things! Do you like tandems? Yes, it's a rotten place, and if I had my way
I'd raze it to the ground!'

I now understand why it is that Mr. Matthew Arnold thinks the average
Briton so very terrible.

By this time we had finished our lunch, and were ready to start. The
watchmaker and his wife had engaged in another battle. She did not agree
with him in his opinion of Canterbury. Indeed I believe they did not
agree upon any one subject, and the tandem had tried their tempers. They
had both said they wanted to see us off, and to compare machines; but we,
being modest people, thought we would as lieve escape without their
comments and farewells. This seemed a favourable opportunity. In the heat
of the argument we left the room and paid our bill, without their noticing
our retreat; but just as we had mounted our tricycle, and were wheeling
softly away, we heard a voice calling, 'Oh, I say now! do come back a
minute: I want to show you my machine!' It would have been more than
uncivil to have refused, so we sat patiently while the much-abused tandem
was brought out. The owner, in his pride, rode out on it, pedalled by us,
and then wheeled round and faced us with an abruptness that fairly took
away our breath. It was the shortest turn I have ever seen, and I waited
for the end with the same uncertainty with which one watches a trapeze
performance. Then there was some little talk about bells and brakes, and
tyres and saddles. In the meantime the landlady, with two or three of her
friends, had come out, and was staring at us with a curiosity for which I
could not account. But presently she said, 'Are you going back soon?' And
then I knew she had heard we were Americans, and had come to have a look
at these strange people who had sailed across the sea, apparently for no
other reason than to test the cycling properties of the roads of Kent.

After this exhibition was over we said good-bye very pleasantly, and rode
off, followed by their wishes for our good luck, while the watchmaker
called out encouragingly, 'You Americans ride pretty well; but I don't
like tandems. Horrid things! Do you like tandems?'

But their wishes were the only good luck we met with. We had not gone far
from Sittingbourne, when we admitted that the pilgrim we had met just
outside of Chatham was no false prophet after all; for the road now began
to be heavy with sand and rough with flints. And oh, the hills! They were
not very steep, but I was a novice in cycling. No sooner were we on
up-grades than I exhausted myself by my vigorous back-pedalling. I have
heard the uninitiated say that tricycling must be so easy, just like
working the velocipedes of our childhood. But let them try! The country
had lost none of its beauty. Fields were as green and golden, orchards as
shady, and sheep as peaceful, as those we had seen before lunch. There
were little churches on hilltops and pretty dingles by the wayside;
handsome country-houses with well-kept lawns, and fields where cricketers
were playing, and young girls in gay-coloured dresses were applauding;
and there were old-fashioned farm-houses and quaint inn-yards. We passed
through villages by which little quiet rivers ran, some with boats lying
by the shore, and others, as at Ospringe, where horses and waggons were
calmly driven through the water. But the heaviness had spread from the
road to my heart, and all joyousness had gone from me.

The worst of it was, that as the road here wound little, we could see it
miles ahead--a white perpendicular line on the purple hill which bounded
the horizon. We knew this must be Boughton Hill, the fame of whose
steepness has gone abroad in the cycling world. With the knowledge of what
was to come ever before me, I began to pedal so badly that J. told me so
very plainly, and said, moreover, that I was more of a hindrance than a
help to him. For some time we rode on very silently. Earlier in the
afternoon we had been passed by a man driving an empty carriage, of whom
we had asked one or two questions. He had stopped to watch the
cricket-match, but he now overtook us, and, to add to my misery, asked me
if I would not like him to drive me into Canterbury. All this was hard to
bear.

Finally, we came to Boughton, a small village with ivy-grown houses and a
squirrel and a dolphin staring at each other amicably from rival inns. It
is right at the foot of Boughton Hill. Now that we were near it, the white
line we had seen for so long widened into a broad road, but it looked no
less perpendicular. It was here that Chaucer's pilgrims
                      'gan atake
  A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
  And undernethe he wered a white surplis.'

There is no record that mine host and the Chanones Yeman dismounted and
walked to rest their horses. But all the many waggons and carriages and
cycles we saw above us on the modern road were being led, not driven.

Halfway up was an old lumbering stage, with boxes piled on the top, and
big baskets and bundles swinging underneath. The driver was walking; but a
tramp, who had made believe to push when on level ground, now sat
comfortably on the backseat, taking his ease. A little lower was the
friendly driver with his empty carriage, for he had rested at the
'Squirrel,' and so we had caught up to him again. At the top we looked
back to see that the West was a broad sea of shining light. A yellow mist
hung over the plain, softening and blending its many colours. Far off to
the north the river glittered and sparkled, and a warm glow spread over
the green of the near hillsides. The way in front of us was grey and
colourless by comparison. It was almost all down-hill after this. Did I
want to be driven into Canterbury, indeed? My benevolent friend might now
have asked us to pull him in. The stage made a show of racing us, but we
gave it only a minute's chance. An officer in braided coat driving a drag
passed us triumphantly while we were on our up-grade; but when we came
again to a level we left him far behind.

  'Wete ye not wher stondeth a litel toun,
  Which that ycleped is Bob up-and-doun,
  Under the blee in Canterbury way?'

It is better known now as Harbledown. A little of our trouble here came
back, for the road leading to that part of it 'ycleped Bob-up,' was steep
and heavy, and we had to walk. To our right were the old red-brick
almshouses and the little church of St. Michael, one of the many oldest
churches in Kent, and of which all we could see was the ivy-covered tower.

It was here that Henry, when on his way to the holy shrine, dismounted,
that, as became his humble calling of pilgrim, he might walk into
Canterbury. And it was here, too, that the Person began his long-winded
discourse. But we, less reverent than King Henry, now mounted again; and,
less phlegmatic than the Person, we held our peace. For as we rode further
up we heard far-away chimes, just as Erasmus did when he went from
Harbledown; and there gradually rose before us a tall, grey tower, then
two more, and at last, as we reached the top of the hill, we saw in the
plain below the great Cathedral itself, standing up far above the low red
roofs of Canterbury. We were almost at our goal.

A little further on we passed a hop-field, where the picking had already
begun. In one part the poles were stripped of their vines, so that it
looked as if the farmer had reaped for his sowing a crop of dead
sticks. In the other the poles were still green, but the day's work was
just over. Women were packing up kettles and pans, jugs and bottles, and
stowing babies and bundles into perambulators, while two or three men were
going the rounds with bag and basket, measuring the day's picking, and
marking off the account of each picker by notching short, flat pieces of
wood held up for the purpose. In the road beyond a large cart, packed with
well-filled bags, was being drawn homewards by three horses, while a young
man rode up and down the green aisles. 'I beg your pardon, Sir,' a farm
hand said to J., who had been sketching, 'but you've been takin' some of
our people, and now you hought to take our Guvnor on his 'oss;' and he
pointed to the young man. All the way into the town we passed groups of
pickers: women with large families of children, small boys with jugs and
coats hung over their shoulders, and young girls with garlands of hops
twisted about their hats, and all were as merry as if they had been on a
picnic. We saw them still before us, even after we had turned into Saint
Dunstan's Street, from which the gold of the afterglow was fast fading,
and were riding between the quaint, gabled houses, through whose
diamond-paned windows lights were beginning to appear. Before us was the
old, grey-towered city gate, through which royal and ecclesiastical
processions and knights and nobles once passed, but where we now saw only
the tramps who had arrived at the eleventh hour sitting at its foot with
their bags and baggage.

We 'toke' our inn at the sign of the 'Falstaff,' without the gate. Honest
Jack, in buff doublet and red hose, hanging between the projecting windows
and far out over the pavement by a wonderful piece of wrought-iron work,
gave us welcome, and within we found rest and good cheer for weary
pilgrims. Then we 'ordeyned' our dinner wisely, but it was too late to go
to the Cathedral that same evening, as we should have liked to have done,
and we were forced to wait for the morrow. After we had come downstairs
from our dimity-curtained bed-chamber, had dined, and were sitting over
our tea in a little, low-ceilinged room, from whose window we looked into
a pretty garden of roses and grapevines, a stranger sent us greeting, and
asked if he might come and sit with us. He was a priest, also making
pilgrimage, who had ridden from Rochester on a machine like ours; so that
we became friendly forthwith, and, like the pilgrims who rested at the
'Chequers of the Hope,' every man of our party
          'in his wyse made hertly chere,
  Telling his felowe of sportys and of chere,
  And of other mirthis that fellen by the way,
  As custom is of pilgrims and hath been many a day.'

And just before we parted for the night we held counsel together and
agreed that, in the morning, we would in company visit the holy shrine.


CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would have been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from the “far east,” making and containing the
notable and once far-famed, “La Crosse valley”; on which is located the
beautiful city of Sparta.

Just beyond La Crosse city, and to the left we see the outline entrance of
Mormon Cooley valley, which creek bounds the lower end of our garden. Now
as we trace the wall to the left,—past the La Crosse valley, and first
eastern gate—we discover another small line of opening through which runs
Half-way creek, notable as the home (Holman) of Norwegians. The next bold
heavy prominence is “King bluff.” Still tracing on, we notice some queer
looking rocks, lying on top of a ridge; then, the Twin points, the outer
one the “Sugar Loaf,” a most beatiful cone mound pointed with rock, and
beckon to Black river valley, this side of which, is “Castle rock;” and to
the left, a wide opening and a beautiful valley,—the central and main
eastern gate—with branching valleys, extending east and northeast, all in
front of you, down which flows the notable “Black river,” appropriately
named, from the natural blackness of its waters, and because it cuts and
divides our garden through its center, and making a beautiful belt of
timbered bottoms. As it nears the Mississippi, it forms a delta, one part
turning to the left, and running parallel to the Mississippi, forming that
grand booming pond, and depot of lumbering at Onalaska; and then empties
itself into the Mississippi at LaCrosse; thus inclosing, and forming
French island, once the resort of counterfeiters.

As you glance up Black River valley, coming in from the right, is
“Flemming’s creek,” or Lewis’ valley, a fertile valley, in which is
located the euphonious Mendora; those blue highlands, apparently at the
head of the main valley is “Robinson’s,” or “Pine Hill,” between Black
River Falls and Sparta. This way to the left, that beautiful notch in the
bluff is “Peacock Pass,” and is just this side of North Bend, and though
apparently so near, is some “twenty miles away.”  This heavy point, at the
left of Black river, is “Heuston’s Bluff,” the next best point from which
to view this valley garden.  To the left and farther away, look at that
great rock, big as a barn, topping out another cone. That is the
veritable “Decora’s Peak,” named after that wonderful one-eyed chieftain,
who, with a few  of his brave and loyal band, lodged, occasionally in a
cave in that rock; and from its hight were enable to discover any game, or
even an enemy within a large range. Once on a time, it is said, he
discovered the prowling “Black Hawk,” with his band of warriors, and ran
to Prairie du Chien, ninety miles in one day, to inform the U. S.

Government; and, then, helped to capture their enemy.  A little farther to
the left, and just across the garden from us wedged in a narrow opening,
lies the village of Galesville, on Beaver creek,—a branch of Black
river,—with its exquisitely beautiful lake, and bounding fish, its fine
water power, health giving mineral springs, Galesville University and
choice people.  “Beautiful for situation” is Galesville, the joy of all
its inhabitants, if not of all the earth.  And “as the hills are round
about Jerusalem,” so are the hills, and vastly more magnificent ones,
round about Galesville, and the scenery simply GRAND. Looking up Beaver
creek valley, to the left, is Maughmer’s bluff which affords a grand view;
and still to the left, that dim mountain peak, pointed with rock and
shrubs (in the direction of Blair, in Trempealeau valley,) is “Chapel
Peak.”  In the early settlement, by whites, of this region of country, two
Methodist itinerants, A. B. Smith and Isaac Springer were  following a dim
wagon track, on their way to Galesville, which track passed along at the
base of that peak; and they clambered to its top, and found there “The
rock-formed pulpit” or altar, which had stood there for ages, into which
they entered, and as they were both good singers, they sang,—to make the
welkins ring, as there was nothing else thereto hear:—
On the mountain-top appearing,
Lo! The sacred Herald stands,
Welcome news in Zion bearing
Zion long in hostile lands.

Still tracing the garden wall as we turn to the left, we face the “Big
Tamarac” through an opening in the wall, a swamp of dense tamarac, one
mile wide, and six miles long, bordered with belts and groves of oak,
furnishing fencing and fuel for the upper end of the garden. Another turn
and you are looking through “Whistler’s Pass,” another of “Nature’s
highways” out of the garden; this leading through the Polander settlement
into the Trempealeau Valley. Another turn and we mark the bluff outline
and entrance into the garden—the third and last eastern gate,—of the
Trempealeau river, crossing it at the upper end; and like Black river, it
forms a delta, one part running down along side of the Mississippi,
forming an island, on the lower end of which, is that wonderful “Mount
Trempealeau,” a rocky cone covered with pine trees, where with the outlet
of Trempealeau lake, it flows through a narrow opening between the
mountain and crescent hanging garden—of which it forms a part—into the
Mississippi river. Trempealeau Lake, at the head of the hanging garden,
just back of the mountain, is a body, principally of spring water, and is
one of the most notable fishing ponds known, attracting fishermen from far
and near. “Trempealeau; surrounded, soaked, fertilized with water.” So
expressive, so important to this region is the word, that the lake, the
island, the mountain, the river, the county; the township, and the village
are all named Trempealeau.

Another slight turn and we are looking into the closed up valley of the
Mississippi,—on account of a bend in the river—which is the fourth and
last river that enters, crosses, and waters this garden is on the west
bank of which, at the upper end of our garden, right there, plainly before
you, lies the charming bustling city of Winona,—associated with a thousand
legends of Indian traditions,—with its tall water tower, its numerous
lumber mills, churches, normal school, and enterprising people, stretching
itself over a smooth and most lovely prairie. Vandal proprietors are
devouring their “Sugar Loaf,” standing just back of the city, as well as
quarrying down their native garden walls.

In our constant turning to the left, that string of white buildings below
Winona, on the river’s bank and pressed against the foot of the wall, is
Homer, a quiet little ville.

In our western view we shall not see so many objects of interest; as not a
river pierces the western wall, only a few little brooks, or trout
harboring runs,—where they used to catch the speckled trout by the bushel,
prominent among which is Cedar run, just, a little above us and Trout run
directly opposite of us, on which is located the celebrated “Pick Wick”
flouring mills—are all that indent or mar its smooth and even face. Then,
everything appears to be so near by. The forms, and farm houses, in such
multiplied variety, so plain in sight, just “Over there,” outside of the
garden, rough and rugged, to where “Fallen Humanity” was driven. And we
are getting tired of looking, so we make a rapid turn, glancing along the
wall down over New Amsterdam and Holland settlement, to the point of
commencement, and are looking into the closed-up valley, on account of
another bend, in this mighty, mighty, Mississippi river, in its exit out
of this Garden of Eden.

As we look down once more on this valley garden land, with its little
silver lakes, and shining streams, beautiful groves and undulating
prairies, and try to peer into its future, we are completely overwhelmed
with emotion, as we notice it is just beginning to be checkered up, by
marks of intelligent human occupancy, as well as by the Indian tepee and
wigwam. But the time of gardening is not yet. And here is room for
hundreds of thousands of the fallen sons of God, to come and regain a home
in this “Paradise on earth” to all such as have a Paradise within them.

Now, will any one believe us? “Come and see!” Dr. Warner and all. Take
this description in your hand, read, and look, and like the “Queen of
Sheba,” you will lose your “spirit of doubting,” and say: “It was a true
report, though I believed it not, but now that mine eyes have seen it, the
one half of its greatness was not told.”

The scenery just outlined, is amazingly grand,
The work of the Deity, worthy his hand.

From our past observation, it is not so very strange to us, that
individuals often pass along over important sections of earth with out
noticing its beauty and its glory. Not that its flowers and its fruits are
altogether hidden, but that they have become common place, or for lack of
attention, on account of preoccupancy of the mind, are not noticed. Nor is
it much wonder that individuals should reside right in the midst of the
garden of Eden and not be aware of it; see many of its peculiar
characteristics, and yet not recognize them; simply because they seem
natural; were indeed natural; just as God made it; or, the results of
natural growth and changes. It is perfectly plain from the Bible account,
and that is our guide in this matter, that Eden was a country, and that
a very important river crossed or ran through and watered that country,
and because of its importance was named Euphrates.—the great river, a very
common ancient method of naming things.—And that, “Eastward,” or on the
eastward bank of that river, central in this Eden, at a certain
point,—where three rivers joined the great river, the four entering, and
crossing the garden, and only the great river running out of it,—was
located the garden of Eden; One of the most desirable places for a human
being to dwell. Conducive of human happiness: First, where there was a
plenty of good water, for human uses, and to fertilize the land, also
for fishes and fowls, and yet exempt from malarial diseases. And we ask,
where can there be found another plat of earth, of the same size and
surroundings, so abundantly watered, and with all the requisites for a
garden, and yet so free from malaria, as is our garden of Eden.  Second,
far enough north to catch the dry, balmy, health inspiring atmosphere, and
the pure water, the native home of the speckled trout, and yet the summer
temperature of the mild temperate zone, a medium from which to send its
inhabitants north and south. Third, exemption from the great terrors of
mankind, earthquake and cyclone. While the mountains are far away “round
about” our Eden, and the minerals in great abundance and variety are
within and about it, yet so far removed are they from the garden, as
entirely to exempt it from earthquakes; as these are confined to sea
coasts, and gas producing regions.  And as cyclones are supposed to be
produced by the sun’s rays,—as they never occur in the night,—and peculiar
electric concentration, which requires uniformity of land, or region, and
heat, and as our garden is sunk down into the earth to the depth of 500
feet, and in a line or direction, requiring a cyclone to cross it at right
angles,—as their course is from the south of west, toward the north of
east—and thus would have to leap the chasm, or loose its force in tumbling
into it,—and such is the uneveness of the country around it as to lessen
liability—for a cyclone is simply an electric wind storm, and not a
thunder storm, and moves in a single cloud, and not spread abroad, and
would be broken by an uneven country; find also on account of the
evaporation arising from the “much water” of our garden, such an electric
heated current could not well be formed across it; so we are naturally
exempt from cyclone, as well as earthquakes, which must be a great relief
of mind, and source of enjoyment to our residents. Yet from its size, and
shallowness, we must still be subject to high and purifying winds, and
rain storms. And as evaporation and consequently the conducting of
electricity from the earth to the cloud regions, must go on more rapidly
in our garden, on a hot day, because of its “much water,” so, doubtless,
we shall always have our full quota of thunder storms. The rains, however,
being generally, of the more steady and general character.

To the language of Bishop Foss in his article on Minnesota, just published
in the Christian Advocate:“From my vantage ground of observation, near
the center of the continent, I greet you and many of your readers on its
distant rim;” we just wish to add, that our garden of Eden is bounded on
the west by southern Minnesota, therefore central. Again, “My point of
observation is lofty as well as central. Minnesota occupies the most
elevated plateau between the Gulf of Mexico and Hudson Bay, and forms the
watershed of three great river systems of the central part of North
America—the Mississippi, the St. Lawrence, and the Red River of the
North—its average elevation being just about 1,000 feet, the highest point
1,600 feet.” Again, “Concerning the climate, I condense the statement of
the Encylopedia Britanica: Its elevation above sea-level gives an
agreeable rarefaction to the atmosphere, and makes the prevalence of fogs
and damp weather unknown. The comparative dryness of the atmosphere
neutralizes the severest effect of excessive cold. The Smithsonian Chart
assigns to Minnesota an average temperature for the hottest week in summer
of from 85° to 90° and for the coldest week in winter from 10° to 20°
below zero. The average annual rainfall is about 25½ inches. It is evident
that the causes which mitigate the actual severity of the climate as felt,
the highest degree.” What is thus true of Minnesota, is pre-eminently so
of our Garden.

While there is in our garden nearly every grade of soil, from the sand
blow-out, to the richest black muck, yet it is principally sandy loam,
just the foundation, for a garden. Still it produces fairly all kinds of
grain.

In our early settlement, over thirty years ago, Deacon Gilbert, raised,
near Galesville, fifty-two bushels of wheat to the acre; and it was
reported of some one raising 60. On a farm, located midway between the
hanging garden and the opposite wall, purchased by D. O. VanSlyke from the
government—as “Hopkins choice,” or the refuse vacant land, and last to be
entered on the prairie, or entire upper end of the garden,—when, at its
best, produced forty bushels of wheat to the acre. And as one forty was
devoted to wheat, several crops were taken, averaging over 35 bushels to
the acre; then gradually decreasing to the fifteenth crop, one having been
of corn, and fourteen of wheat, without the application of any fertilizers
whatever, when it produced only 18 bushels of No. 1 wheat to the acre.

These facts came within my own observation, and are probably, above the
average of the entire garden; as the assessors assessed this farm, for a
number of years at nineteen dollars per acre, when it was offered for sale
at fifteen dollars per acre. But Trempealeau Prairie has been notable for
many years as the “Egypt” for corn producing. And we have no way of
estimating what could be done in the line of gardening, for lack of a
market, or capitalists to successfully enter competition. But as to the
apple-tree, that appears to have been driven out with fallen man; and
whether redeemed man can restore it, is a question, as it is not designed
at present, for man to live on the spontaneous productions of the earth.

Of the scenery we have never tired. It is always fresh and enchanting. And
such an inspiring feeling, of “this is my home!” “O what a delightful
home!”

If any, who pass along at the base of Chappel Peak, on a clear day will
take the foot path and ascend it to its top, its altitude probably not 200
feet above them, they will have within easy range of the eye such a
landscape scene, as but few upon earth ever have the privilege of looking;
and one that will greatly enthuse an admirer of nature. And they will be
apt to feel as well as to see the appropriateness of its name. If they can
sing, or preach, they will want to join with those preachers, and sing, or
preach to an assembled world, seated within the incircling walls.

If you are at Galesville, ask some one to point out “Heuston’s Bluff,” you
need no guide, only good walking muscles, pick your way, and tug on until
you reach the top. Then, after taking a general look all around you, sit
down and rest you. Now, take another general sweeping birds-eye view, all
around, seeing everything in the aggregate; then rest awhile, and
contemplate it.

Now you are, or ought to be, prepared to itemize, or to look attentively
at particular objects; and if you have our description, it will greatly
assist, as well as interest you. We believe that no grander garden valley
scene exists on this beautiful earth. Therefore patiently wait, don’t
cease your viewing, or think of leaving the place in less than two hours;
or until you fully realize the “inspiration” of this masterly scene; and
we have no fears, if you are anything of an admirer of the magnificent in
nature, but that you will thank us a thousand times for calling your
attention to it.

That heavy bold front in the garden wall beyond the mouth of Black River
is “King bluff” which is now easily distinguished as the central highest
point in the eastern wall, and which is just opposite of “Queen bluff,”
the central highest point in the western wall of our garden, and said to
be the highest land on the Mississippi river. Here, from Heuston’s bluff,
we have a better view of Black river, and its tributaries, than from our
former place of observation.  Now we stand as it were right over them, and
can see to the “Northward and Eastward.” “Alps on Alps arise;” Decora’s
Peak and Mound so plainly and beautifully near; then those most beautiful
cone mountains, and Chapel Peak, up Beaver creek, points for beacon
lights, and charmingly beautiful scenes looming up most conspicuously.  We
do say that you can find many grand valley and landscape scenes on the
Mississippi, and its tributaries, and we do not wonder that good writers
extol them,—should wonder if they did not,—but we further say that we have
the Garden; and everything considered, not only the greatest, and
grandest, and best, but the only spot on earth that answers the Bible
description of that notable spot, or Garden of Eden.

Moritz Engel of Dresden-Newstadt, Germany, has written a book, an octavo
of 207 pages, dated Adam’s and Eve’s day, December 1884, entitled: “The
Solution of the Paradise Question.” To a review of this book, President W.

J. Warren of the Boston University, has devoted over a column in the
Christian Advocate of Aug. 20, 1885. Engel claims to demolish, and
doubtless does, the preceding “eighty nugatory attempts at a solution.”

And as anyone can see, Dr. Warren demolishes Engel’s attempt to foist his
riverless “Tartarian swale in the heart of the North Syrian desert,” as
the veritable Eden; in the lower end of which was his Garden, alternating
between a pool or lake, caused by the rains, and filled by the torrents
during the rainy season, and a dried up, parched, barren spot, drying up,
“towards the end of May, or first of June; without a green thing,”—utterly
uninhabitable,—and which Engel admits, “has always been so.”

The chief value of Engel’s production, as well as Dr. Warren’s North Pole
Garden, is to show, (in Dr. Warren’s own language.) “The imperishable
interest of the Eden problem;” and to leave the subject entirely clear for
me, and a calm consideration of the facts of the case as we find them. Dr.
Warren, naturally, (as anyone who undertakes to do a thing and fails,)
scouts the idea of anyone else doing it, or of a litteral four rivered;
Garden of Eden. So have others who have failed to find it.

Engel puts in a claim of Divine inspiration directing him to the spot; and
he writes with the positiveness and unreasonableness of a crank. All the
inspiration we claim, is the beauty and grandeur of the scenery, and the
adaptation and facsimile, or actual description of the spot, to the
description given in the Bible, a Divinely inspired book, as our guide to
it.

We are aware that we are living in an age of scientific speculation, of
counterfeits, and humbugs. After misguided explorers have given up the
search, in the Eastern Continent, a scientest, to show his skill, must
throw a cloud on the possibility of finding a literal “four rivered spot,”
on earth, and gives us an ingenious unaproachable North Pole Garden. A
crank gives us a volcanic “Tartarian,” riverless desert as the spot,
under a profession of Divine inspiration, A land speculator, must dress up
a Florida malarial swamp as the place, to entice purchasers to his lands.

Now, providentially, we are clear of all these objections. We do not have
an unapproachable, frozen sea; or Tartarian volcanic region;  or malarial
swamp; or government, or company, lands to sell. Our Garden is principally
owned by actual settlers. All the land I own, is a burial lot in the
Galesville cemetery, and not for sale; and not many have money enough to
purchase it.

But we have an Eden that challenges your attention; and a Garden that
will awaken your admiration.  Come and see! Please notice the natural
youuthfulness of the region immediately around our Garden. Take about a
hundred miles square,—of which our Garden is the centre,—and you will have
some of the most charming mountain and valley scenery in the world, minus
the mountains, or all in miniature, just such hills and valleys in which
the youth most delight. A more appropriate region to surround the Garden
we cannot conceive.  While immediately outside of this region you enter
upon a broad level country, principally prairie, of rich farming lands,
indicating the next step in developed humanity, and the very beau ideal of
an Eden; and as you go outward, the earth abounds in minerals, and in
unlimited sources of wealth. Take a map of Palestine giving a birds-eye
view of the hills and valleys, of which Jerusalem is somewhat central, and
you will have a fair representation or view of the region around our
Garden, and see the force of the expression, “as the hills are round about
Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about his people,” and so are the hills
round about our Garden.

Did you say as you looked down over our Garden valley, that this is too
large a plat of ground for the Garden of Eden? Bless you! have you not
considered that the Garden should be proportionate to the Land of Eden?

Why, did you think that the Garden of Eden was only a half-acre garden
patch, or small orchard? Read again your Bible on that subject. How could
you get four rivers into it then, to water it, and one of them a
“Euphrates” a wonderful great river? And is not the usual idea of a
garden, a beautiful rich flat, or valley, like Lot’s plain of Jordan?

Please just think again, how God had created the whole earth for the
habitation of the human family, and would he stint the allotment of the
first pair? Did you think how long they lived, how many children they
probably had, what a numerous family before the first pair died, numbering
into the ten thousands? Did you ever give thought to the plan of
settlement, of these children? Of the necessity of water thoroughfares,
and the wisdom of God in locating them in some grand centre, as is this
garden, in this central, wonderful water-shed in this Eden as already
shown, comprising the great centre of this continent; and that when this
garden should be well filled with inhabitants, by means of boats, and easy
water conveyance, they could easily branch out and make settlements along
the rivers? Can you grasp the mightiness of Jehovah’s plan, in locating
the first pair at the junction of so many rivers into one so great a
river, and central to this Eden; thus naturally and easily to extend the
settlements over so vast a region of excellent country, as this Eden—the
greatest half of a continent,—and all this before the invention of wagon
roads and railroads. Please give it wise thought, before deciding it so
quickly.

Did you pugh! pugh! at the idea of the garden, and antdieluvian
settlements, being so far away from Mt. Ararat? An ingenious Yankee, F. H.

Kribs, has figured that out long ago; that the ark would naturally go
eastward, and would just about reach that mountain in the time it was
floating; and that the current ran eastward is proven by the eastward
direction of submerged antediluvian trees. Then, how natural that God
should remove the redeemed ones far away from the scenes and remembrances
of human corruption and abominations before the flood; and let him develop
“up anew,” in the midst of new scenes and surroundings, and, as it were,
in a “new world,” until the sufficient development of his being, to allow,
by slow stages, to return him to the place of commencement. Did you ask
what mean these mounds, or earthly representations of such a variety of
living objects, so plentiful in and around this garden, and scattered
throughout the country of Eden, on one of which we are now standing? There
was science and durability in their construction. Did he say they were
built by the mound-builders? Evidently; but who are the mound-builders?

That is not in history or tradition. The first who came here after the
flood, found the mounds here, and asked the question: who are the
mound-builders? The mound-builders were silent. And every new comer and
every generation have asked that question, but no one could answer.

Naturally enough, “There was not one left to tell the tale.” They had
unwisely, and laboriously used their time, strength, and ingenuity, for
unworthy objects and purposes, and not for the comfort, education, and
moral development of humanity. They had added to their folly wickedness;
“they had changed the truth of God into a lie;” had “served and worshiped
the creature, (and dirt images) and not their Creator;” and God had
blotted them out, while some of their earthworks remain.

Did a lawyer from this place, make a point in his plea before court at
Whitehall, by declaring that I must be mistaken in my locality of the
Garden of Eden, for lack of the presence of a personal devil? In retort, I
am compelled to say, that I was sent a missioniary to this region, over
thirty years ago, and that I found the devil, or his tools, then
predominating in the M. E. society here; and when we tried to “turn the
rascals out,” we found that he, or they, outnumbered us in influence and
facilities, and turned the scale against us; and we have abundant facts to
show that he has held his grip in that society “unto this day.”

Did that Witty Editor say that we could prove our proposition by Josh
Billings’ method; viz.: “that no one could prove that it was not the
Garden of Eden?” Very good. But we can do better. We can and have proved
it, on scientific principles. We give a law: “An hypothesis that explains
all the phenomena, and contradicts every opposing hypothesis, is
considered proof.” Now, our hypothesis, and exact description of the plat,
explains the phenomena, answers perfectly the requirements; and, as it is
admitted that no other known plat on earth does so, we claim the proof,
and shall hold the ground until driven from it by a more successful
discoverer. And we do not fear Dr. Warren as competitor, though he has
also written a book; as he must first go, or get some one to go to the
North pole and survey his garden before he can bring in his proof, (and
that, doubtless, will let us out during the present generation) and
without which proof we will laugh down his theory, and his book, the
editor of the Christian Advocate to the contrary notwithstanding.

We have necessarily, given a very condensed statement, and discription, to
meet, developed modern, as well as original modes of thinking, and to give
the less developed ones an opportunity to study.

In giving the description of the Garden of Eden, does the Bible, there, or
anywhere, say so, or is there any grounds to believe, or suppose that it
was written or printed in legible imperishable characters, on the walls
around, on the sky above, or on conspicuous places within the garden,
“This is the Garden of Eden?” If not, what is our guide? Evidently not a
Lo here, or a Lo there, but the plain description, fairly interpreted, and
the place that answers that description; and we have it. Now, the public
press of La Crosse, and Winona, within the borders of our garden and who
might be supposed to know the merit, or demerit of my claim, have not
deigned to notice my articles on the Garden of Eden; so they cannot be
accused of conspiring with me to mislead the public, to attract to their
cities; or of having any faith in my discovery; and yet, I challenge any
of them to show any material incorrectness of my description and
statements.

Once, when on a steamboat, coming up the Mississippi, through our garden,
and standing forward, on the upper deck, near a well dressed gentleman,
who was intently looking at and admiring scenery which had also attracted
my attention, he turned suddenly, and excitedly said, “See! (pointing) O
see, that most enchantingly lovely scene, there!” (as if he had never
before seen its equal.) “There, if an artist should paint that, they would
say, ‘That is purely imaginary; the result of fancy’; but there is the
foundation and excitement to his art; and no known artist can measure up
to the reality.” Perhaps neither of us will ever again see so enraptureing
a scene of clouds, shades, lights and shadows, of bluff scenery,—and that
means something here—of beautiful islands and forest trees, as was just
then around us, and mirrored to us in that grand old looking-glass, on
whose placid waters we were then floating. Being of like sympathy, I
entered into conversation with him, when he kindly informed me, that, to
gratify his passion for scenery, he had traveled extensively in the old
world, or foreign countries, that he was now taking in the Mississippi
River, and that this was the most beautiful and attractive river scenery
he had ever seen in his life; and that it far surpassed anything they had
seen in the old world. I have had several similar statements of noted
travelers, enough, with what I have seen myself, to satisfy me of the
truthfulness of my claim. I have taken several acknowledged eminent
travelers to my first point of observation, (Healds Bluff) who invariably,
like myself, evidently, labored, and failed for language adequately to
express the overwhelming beauty and grandeur of this valley scene. Now, if
ours is not the veritable original Garden of Eden, it is certainly easy of
access, of increasing reputation and importance as a summer resort, and
open to investigation, and we challenge the strictest inspection. Come and
see! Come and see!

I am glad to learn from the Editor of the Independent that I am not the
first one who has “located the old Bible ground in the Northwest;” would
like very much to see the volume alluded to, “written fifty years ago,”
treating that subject.  Perhaps we might gain some information from one
who had given it close intelligent thought, as well as some very desirable
information on this somewhat mysterious subject. Mine was an entire new
thought to me, suggested by the actual sight, viewing the garden from a
point on the hanging garden, and studying it over and over during my
residence here of over thirty years.  And despite of my natural
skepticism, I have become so impressed with the striking resemblance or
exact likeness of this, to the Bible garden, as therein, described, and
the immediate surroundings of this, to Palestine, (the type of the
surrounding or original habitation of man) as to force me to admit the
possibility, and to write out my convictions for the benefit of some one
better informed, and to enable such a one to draw better conclusions.

When God formed the earth into a globe, and set it rolling to keep it so,
and started it in its orbit around the sun, and the light of the sun first
flashed upon it, producing the requisite light and motion, for marking
time, then, with half in light and half in shade, as round the sun earth
took its flight, time on earth began. The day, the month, the year.

Chronological time commenced on the first day at high 12, and “The evening
and the morning  was the first day.” And as man was the only
intelligent being placed on earth, capable of noting time, his residence
was, evidently, on that central line. Our “long” river and garden of Eden,
is exactly there, on the 90th meridian of central time, as laid down on
our present time table maps for this continent.

As everything in creation was full and perfect, God wisely placed the
earth in the summer solstice point of its orbit, and this continent facing
the sun, so that when he placed man upon it, as to give him the benefit of
harvest, and correct time, and all of which is proved by the change, God
ordered, from original reckoning of time, when Israel left Egypt, Ex. 12,
2, “This month  shall be unto you the beginning of
months, it shall be the first month of the year to you.” Thus changing the
beginning of the year from mid-summer to mid-winter. The commencing of the
reckoning of the day has also been changed from mid-day to midnight. That
the original first month, now the 7th month, was harvest time, is proved
from Lev. 23, 9-39; and that the seasons, of summer and winter, were then
as now, is also proven by Gen. 1, 14, and the history of the clothing of
the first pair, first aprons, then skins and furs.

The names given to the rivers and places, in connection with the original
habitation of man, were naturally washed out by the flood, or their
recollection continued in names of similar places on the new continent.

Then, is it not somewhat remarkable that, our garden valley is in the form
of a beautiful dove, or bird of paradise; and so grandly walled in as to
appear as a single valley, and have a hanging garden so situated that from
its height, the whole valley, the rivers, and “much water” all in plain
sight.

Is it not a little strange that the Holy Land should be the counterpart of
the regions around our garden, only ours, geologically, a little older,
and at present, at least, vastly superior in productiveness and
desirability as a home; and that so many things, in connection with and in
addition to, the exact Bible description of the garden of Eden, and of the
Holy Land, point to this place as the original garden; oldest, and best
adapted place on earth for the commencement of human existence, and from
which naturally to branch out, filling the Palestine around it; then, over
the entire Eden as already described. Let me once more call your attention
to the region immediately around our garden, of a section of which we have
such a good view from this Heuston’s Muff, of beautiful hills and valleys,
similar in appearance and extent, to the land of Palestine; which was
selected by the Creator as a representation of the habitation of man on
earth, in its pristine glory; a beau ideal of a country, a paradise; a
region of supreme felicity and delight; “A land flowing with milk and
honey;” which means susceptibility of the highest earthly enjoyments, and
figure of the world to come. Such a rough, youthful country, is not
naturally subject to cyclones, and disastrous storms, “but of rains,” and
“green pastures;” not a land of malaria, but a land of health and
happiness. Palestine was central to the habitable part of the eastern
continent, and was thus, in connection wilh its other good qualities,
selected for the residence of God’s chosen people, and contained many of
the mountains on which God appeared to man, a very interesting chapter in
the history of that country. Then, the central location of Jerusalem, “the
city of the great King;” “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth, is Mount Zion;” in which was built the Holy Temple—of which God
himself was architect—with its Holy of Holies, where God met the High
priest, and kept up, though somewhat broken, yet, for long periods,
special communication with man, thus making it a holy and God honored
spot. There the Jews used to point to a stone, set as they claimed, by
some miraculous power, in the precise centre of the world. But whether
this was so or not, the city was for a long time the centre of attraction
of the world’s commerce, and of the best form of religion.

“A land flowing with milk and honey.” Yes, and that we have the place we
hope to make appear by a few extracts from a speech delivered by T. D.

Lewis, before the Wisconsin Dairymen’s Association, at Arcadia,
Trempealeau County, Wisconsin, February, 1885, published by the Dairymen’s
Association. Mr. Lewis, not knowing of our garden and Palestine, spoke
only in reference to what is beginning to be recognized, and well known
facts in relation to the dairying interests of this region. Commencing on
page 76: “As good, natural grasses and plenty of the right kind of water
are the material requisites necessary to successful dairying or
stock-growing generally, I propose to discuss in a brief manner, and for
the first time, call the attention of the public to the peculiar quality
of the soil in this section, and its adaptability for successful grass
growing, especially clover, and of its action, through the grasses and
believe, generally conceded by all stock growers that there is no known
plant grown that requires so small an outlay of labor and expense
generally, and furnishes so great an amount of plant food of just the
right kind for producing the best butter, cheese, and good, quickly
fattened beef, as clover, where it can be grown with anything near
eight or ten years ago, by noticing spots along the roads where clover had
sprung up in small patches, in soil either wild, or but, at the most,
partially subdued. I observed that it grew in the most luxuriant manner,
and spread rapidly, did not winter kill; in fact, looked just as if it had
come to stay. I then began a thorough examination of the soil that I have
not yet entirely completed, but have ascertained enough to warrant me in
saying, that through the agency of the decomposition of an ancient stratum
of rock, of which the most of our argillaceous clays are composed in this
vicinity, I find we have a soil peculiarly adapted to the growth of
creamery butter took the first, and the Alma creamery the second premium
at the fair held at St. Louis last fall?  This was from butter made in
Arcadia the second, and in Alma the first season of their opperation. You
could not believe, for a moment, that the butter makers employed in these
two creameries were so much better than all the others that exhibited
butter at that time, that this was the cause of obtaining the premiums? I
find, also, that the Arcadia butter, when placed upon the Elgin market of
Illinois, is considered superior to the other butter, in all the qualities
that go to make up a first-class article, and that is the largest butter
market, outside of Chicago, in the state. You would most certainly assign
this cause to other and more correct reasons, and, by an investigation
into the facts, would find it was produced through the effects of this
peculiar chemical material, in its action through the grasses and water of
his government survey of this state and Minnesota, will see a small area,
colored and marked metamorphic shades. It is no great extent of territory,
includes this and Buffalo county, and a portion of Jackson, and about us
much in Minnesota. It has been badly cut up through the agencies of
erosion, corrosion, and denudation, and probably one-fourth of this area
is now composed of arenaceious valleys, practically inexhaustible.” Clover
fields, “flowing with milk and honey,” how appropriate. A Wisconsin
Dairyman took the first premium on butter at the Worlds fair, at
Philedelphia, in 1876; at the World’s Exposition at New Orleans, in 1880,
in dairy products, Wisconsin, Iowa and Minnesota stands at the head; and
the head centre of which, when once developed, is our palestine. In cheese
products, at New Orleans, out of 84 premiums, Wisconsin took 71, amounting
to $2,838. On butter, out of 69 premiums, Iowa, Minnesota and Wisconsin
took 54, amounting to $3,364, thus leading the world.

Thus who can predict the future greatness of our garden, and the region
around it; naturally exempt from cyclone—which is beginning to be one of
the great terrors of man-kind—as it would require a miracle to leap a
cyclone from the top of our southwestern wall, down 600 feet, on to the
broad Mississippi river—and into a decidedly different atmosphere, the
reason already given—and keep a whirling. Thirty years of observation has
taught me, that small, single storms pass around us, and larger ones,
often, divide, and, no matter how portentous they look, as  did the one
the other day—since the St Cloud cyclone—which, at first sight,
approaching from the southwest, at the right time of day, and frightful
blue black color, made the timid ones tremble: but on approaching the
garden, it naturally divided, and passed around us, as usual; thus
confirming our statement.

Not being a believer in the speculative vague theories of modern
geologists, I shall leave the discussion of the geological age of our
garden to those wiseacres. But simply notice, that according to standard
authorities, our hanging garden contains the veritable Potsdam sand stone
of the primordial age. And my stone door step, taken from another strata,
is a mass of Molusk shells of the tribe of Brachiopods—specimens of the
earliest life on earth—the shells “less in size than a finger nail;” (see
Dana’s geology page 81) related to the modern Lingula; thus composing a
Lingula flag, or Lingula sandstone, of which mine is a slab over 5 feet
long, 2 feet wide and six inches thick, the finest specimen I have ever
seen, and lies at my front door, free for inspection.

Thus, on the oldest continent, with an overwhelmingly rich, great, grand
Eden; watered by the “Uphrates,” (long river) which, in itself, is
superlative; and which, with its tributaries, waters a superlatively grand
portion of the earth; and with its central garden, and surpassingly grand
hanging gardens, which overtop, and as immeasurably transcend the hanging
gardens of Babylon—which tourists travel thousands of miles to see—as does
the Niagra Falls, a common creek mill pond, or as the works of nature
transcend the works of art.  And did not God know which was the longest
river on earth, and which, with its tributaries, watered the grandest
region of country on earth, Eden, when he said the garden was on it?

When all these things shall be properly understood by the public, who will
not wish to come and see? Yes come and see!! “Be not faithless, but
believing,” come and see!! And now may the King Eternal, banish the evil
one from this place forever, and build his promised “New Jerusalem” here,
or to have an extensive one within our Palestine.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VI. - A SKETCH OF LIFE IN THE PHILIPPINES.


House-keeping in the Philippines presents some interesting phases. Our
club of American officials decided to run a mess, so we employed a
cook and a house boy, then each of us provided himself with a personal
servant, making a total of six servants for four men--it takes about
this proportion of servants to live in any sort of comfort in the
Philippines--and launched ourselves boldly upon the sea of domestic
economy. But there were shoals ahead of us, for the question of
regulating servants is one of no small importance in the Philippines,
and one of its most disadvantageous features is the long chain of
dependents that usually attends it.

We gave the cooks so much a day with which to buy supplies in the
local market, for our own table, making him render a daily list of
expenditures, and a fixed amount besides to purchase rice and fish for
himself and the other servants. Of course, if they wished to vary
their diet and get chicken and fresh pork, which could be had at far
distant intervals, it was wholly a matter of their option, but the
allowance was made on the basis of so much rice and fish a day for
each. This allowance was about fifteen cents a day in Spanish coin per
servant.

Thus far all was well. We had agreed to give the cook eight dollars a
month in Spanish money, thinking that good wages would procure good
service, but the visions of affluence that floated before him on such
floods of wealth were so alluring that they drew him from the kitchen
to the cooler veranda. In less than a week he had employed an
assistant at four dollars a month; in less than another week that
assistant had employed him an assistant at two dollars a month; in
less than another week that assistant to the assistant had employed
him an assistant at the princely salary of fifty cents a month; and
from fear that the chain of dependents would end only by our having
the whole Filipino race attached to our culinary force, we broke up
house-keeping and went boarding again, choosing that as the less of
the two evils.

Our house furnishings were almost wholly Philippine. The table ware
and the food on the table came from the ends of the earth. The knives
and forks were made in Germany, the plates were manufactured in
England, the glass ware and table cloth, in the United States. The
oatmeal and flour came from the United States also. The butter came
from Australia, the rice from China, the salt from Russia, and the
other eatables from sources about as various as their separate names.

Switzerland furnished the condensed milk and Illinois the canned
cream. Nearly all of the canned fruit bore labels from Spain.

Thus it can easily be seen that life in the Philippines, if lived
according to American ideals, is dependent upon a highly developed and
highly complex commerce. However, the difficulties of transportation
and the restriction of large stocks of merchandise to Manila and some
half a dozen other towns, make so great a difference between country
life and city life that a short comparison of the two will not be out
of place, and life in Manila may well be taken as being fairly typical
of the latter.

Life in Manila is pleasant, but expensive. It is pleasant from the
fact that it is not only the capital but also metropolis of the
archipelago. Thus the combination of wealth and high official position
has given to Manila a society of the highest and most refined type.

The process of beautifying and improving the city which is constantly
going on bids fair to give us at no distant day a city of which we may
well be proud.

But let him who intends living well in Manila on a small income bid
farewell at once to so idylic a dream, for it costs much to live well
there. In the city of Manila one can get almost anything he wishes,
but it must be paid for at the price it commands. Especially in the
case of eatables, this price is by no means small, because to the
first cost of articles must in most cases be added the expense of
distant shipment from American, European, or Australian ports, and not
infrequently the cost of long refrigeration must also be taken into
consideration. But, expensive though it is, it is very pleasant to
live there and those who have once enjoyed it often wish again to
quaff the cup of its delights.

In strong contrast to this pleasant life is the life of the quiet
little hamlet away in the distant islands. Indeed, the Filipino from
the distant town, who by some good fortune has been to Manila, or, by
a coup de main, has studied in one of the Manila colleges, is looked
up to in a true hero-worshiping attitude by all who either know him or
hear of his fame. Life in such a place is one long state of harmless
inactivity. Not a wave of trouble from the great outer world ever
disturbs its peaceful repose. One lounges forever in an air of
indolent ease and extreme aversion to anything approaching what might
be called a respectable effort.

One arises in the morning about the time the sun's first rays silver
the top leaves of the cocoanut trees and then stirs around until nine
or ten o'clock, when it is found expedient to avoid a further exposure
to the sun. From then until about five o'clock in the afternoon it is
best to take things as they come, even though one of those things be a
Filipino dinner. But then you may have your vehiclo attached to a
young bull with a ring in his nose and go for a drive. If it is the
dry season you will probably enjoy the drive unless you object to the
frequent clouds of dust swept along by the evening wind. If it is in
the rainy season your pleasure will depend to a considerable extent
upon how wet you get; but, whether the season be wet or dry, your
pleasure will be regulated largely by the state of harmony existing
between the driver and the bull.

In these quiet secluded nooks successive generations of Filipinos are
born, reared, grow old and die in an even chain of events broken only
by the occasional erection of a new grass house on the identical spot
where its predecessors have stood for ages. The son lives in the house
of his father, cultivates the same few square feet of soil planted in
edible roots, climbs the same cocoanut trees, follows the same winding
path down to the stream, pounds rice in the same mortar and with the
same stick that his ancestors have used from time unremembered, and,
in case of illness, curls up on a grass mat in a corner of the room
until he dies or by some good fortune recovers. Beyond this narrow
horizon he never looks. So narrow and contracted is the life that the
languages of two towns a few miles apart are so different that one
would scarcely recognize them as belonging to the same race of people.

Such are the two extremes of life in our new far Eastern provinces:
the one is active, progressive, and cosmopolitan; the other, inactive,
decadent, and narrow; but, whether one enjoys the first or endures the
second, there comes to him after leaving a longing to lounge again in
tropic airs and listen to the lullaby of the winds among the palms.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VII. - THE FILIPINO AT HOME.


As one enters a Filipino sitting-room for the first time, there is one
feature in the arrangement of the furniture that impresses itself upon
him at once, and it may be stated without fear of serious
contradiction that this same peculiar feature in its arrangement will
continue to face him, as he enters different homes, about as certainly
as he crosses the threshold.

The arrangement referred to is that of one large mirror, one settee,
and some ten or a dozen chairs that appear to have had a certain
orderly affection for one another. The mirror is hung upon one of the
large interior parts of the house about four feet above the floor. The
wooden houses in the Philippines are built by setting large posts
upright into the ground, extending into the air from twenty to thirty
feet. Cross timbers are fastened to these upright posts about eight or
ten feet above the ground and then not sawed off even with the posts,
but allowed to extend beyond them each way. The framework of the house
is built upon these extending cross timbers, a style of building by
which these large upright posts are left standing out on the inside of
the room from one to three feet from the walls. It is on that one of
these posts most nearly opposite the door that the mirror always finds
its place. Immediately beneath the mirror is the settee; and the
chairs are arranged in two parallel lines facing one another and at
right angles with the ends of the settee. However odd this arrangement
may appear to one when he first enters a Filipino drawing-room, there
are two things to be said in its favor. In the first place, it places
you face to face with the person with whom you are conversing so that
you can watch him,--a matter of no small moment in the Philippines. In
the next place, it enables you to give one of the young ladies a
sheep's-eye in the mirror while the others present are left where
Moses was in our much abused conundrum.

The size of the residence and the quality of its furnishings depends
upon the wealth of the owner. But there is so vast a difference
between the mode of life of the highest class and the tao, or lowest
class, that it is well to speak of them separately, and the great
middle class of Filipinos can easily be imagined to occupy the
intervening ground.

The rich Filipino's house is usually of wood built upon a wall of
stone or brick from ten to fifteen feet high. The floors are kept
highly polished in his hallway, dressing-room, and bed-rooms. There
are, of course, no fire-places in any of the rooms, but on some
occasions something is needed to dry the rain-soaked atmosphere, for
even in the dry season it has been seen to rain for five successive
days and nights without the cessation of a moment.

A long chain of dependents is attached to the household of the rich
Filipino. The master has his special body servant to be present at all
times to do his master's bidding, in short, to be the visible
mechanism of his master's volition. So, too, the lady of the house has
her servant woman to do the slightest bidding of her ladyship. Then
there is the cook who is almost invariably a man, a house boy or two,
and the coachman. These functionaries, with their assistants and
assistants to the assistants, together with a servant or two for the
exclusive service of the children, complete the economic household.

Such a family has an abundance of rice and wheat bread, also of
chicken and fish with occasional fresh beef. They have also a good
deal of dulce. They regularly serve wine and frequently serve beer
on their tables.

In strong contrast with this mode of life is that of the tao. His
diet consists almost wholly of rice and small uncleaned fish boiled
together. As a rule knife, fork, plate, and spoon find no place in his
household. The rice and fish are boiled in a pot and then allowed to
cool in the same vessel or poured out to cool in a large earthen or
wooden bowl. Then Mr. Tao together with Mrs. Tao and all the young
Taos squat on their heels around the mixture and satisfy that
intangible thing called the appetite. They do not use chop sticks as
the Chinese do, but the rice and fish are caught in a hollow formed by
the first three fingers of the right hand. The thumb is then placed
behind the mass. It is raised up and poised before the mouth, with a
skill coming from the evolution of ages, when a contraction of the
muscles of the thumb throws the mass into the mouth with a skill that
is marvelous to any but a Filipino. To judge from the most reliable
information, the poorest class do not have an abundance of food,
although it would seem that such a condition of things would be
well-nigh impossible. However, in a census of one hundred school
children there were found six boys and four girls who declared that
they had never had enough to eat, and the native teacher stated that
this was probably true.

The wide gulf between the tao and the rich man is filled by the
great middle class of Filipinos.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VIII. - VISIT TO A LEPER COLONY.


Not far from our town was a leper colony and the first Saturday that
could be spared was set aside for a trip to the place. It happened
that none of the other Americans were at leisure on this particular
morning, but, rather then delay the trip or miss it altogether, the
writer, armed with a revolver, started out alone.

The road had been described so accurately by one who was supposed to
know it that it was deemed well-nigh impossible to miss the way. The
main highway was followed to the point where the by-path supposed to
lead to the settlement turned off through some bamboo thickets and a
low tropical wood. This path led straight away towards the sea-coast
where the houses of the colony were said to stand in a cocoanut grove
by the beach.

Upon arriving at the settlement, a very inhospitable reception was
received from a mangy cur that growled and showed a very uninviting
set of sharp, white teeth behind his snarling lips. The growling of
the dog had attracted the attention of an old man who, with age-bent
back, was pounding rice in a mortar about fifty yards away. He turned
slowly around and, upon seeing an intruder into the primitive quiet of
the place, gave a sharp, far-reaching call. The sound had scarcely
rung through the grove when from about a dozen of the little grass
houses dotted here and there fifteen or twenty men armed with bolos
came out and gathered around the old man. A sense of my danger flashed
upon me. Three miles from town and alone in a tropical jungle, I could
be almost instantly overcome by this band of bolo-men, and the only
report that would ever reach my people would be that I had
"disappeared." Of course, attack was by no means certain, but the
potentiality of the situation was thrilling. A drawn revolver and the
gleaming of its shining barrel had the effect of stopping the men, who
seemed to be hesitating as to a course of action, until a somewhat
dignified retreat was made to an open space in the rear from where a
less dignified and a more hasty retreat began which did not stop short
of Bacalod.

Enough had been seen, however, even in this short visit, to give
convincing proof that the settlement visited was no colony of lepers;
so, that afternoon two servant boys being taken as guides and
interpreters, another attempt was made to reach the goal desired.

This attempt was successful, and, after about two hours of walking, a
little cluster of grass huts snugly hidden by the sea-coast came into
view. As we approached, one would have thought it a gala-day. Some few
children, apparently from six to thirteen years of age, almost wholly
nude, were romping and playing in the open space around which the huts
stood, and no one would ever have thought that any cloud so horrible
as leprosy could hover over a place apparently so happy.

By the side of the path as we passed was a man and his wife setting
out potato plants. His hands were so puffed and his fingers so short
that he could scarcely use them, but he was working along as best he
could. His wife's feet were so swollen and twisted that she walked
only with the greatest difficulty. We passed them by and entered the
open space above referred to.

The children now saw us, and those of them who could darted away like
frightened rabbits, each to his own burrow. An old man who was sitting
in the warm afternoon sun on the little bamboo platform before his hut
was aroused from his lethargic repose by the scampering away of the
children. He arose, trembling upon his tottering limbs, all drawn and
twisted, and hobbled away into his hut.

The children soon recovered from their fright and began to reappear at
the doors of the houses, from which now also came the men and women of
the settlement. In a few moments we were surrounded by a circle of
human beings at once so repulsive and so pitiable that its graphic
vividness can never be accurately portrayed.

The old man referred to above, having put on a pair of snow-white
pantaloons, appeared now at the doorway of his hut, followed a few
moments later by his wife who had evidently clothed herself in the
best raiment she had. At a call from the old man, all the men, women,
and children in the settlement came out of their huts and stood in a
line before us. The old man was spokesman and in his native visayan
tongue made a heart-rending appeal for aid which we were powerless to
give. Attention was called to a leper woman, apparently about
twenty-five years of age, whose face had been attacked by the disease
and whose appearance was truly pathetic. Upon her hip was a child
about a year and a half old and, strange to say, the child showed as
yet no signs whatever of the disease.

What an indissoluble enigma is life! Here in a little cluster of grass
huts in a secluded nook of a secluded island of an all but secluded
archipelago was gathered together a little community of wretched
natives, driven by their loathsomeness from association with others
even of the same half-savage race. Yet here, men and women loved and
were married, by mutual trust if not by law, and children were born of
the union to live forever under the unspeakable horror that
overshadowed the unfortunate parents. Love, hatred, sorrow, and
joy--every passion that enters into the complex structure of the human
heart even here, in this scene of sadness and despair, was playing
apparently as freely as where misfortune and disease had never crossed
the portals of life.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER IX. - A "HIKE."


We were lounging lazily in our hammocks at Jimamaylan one evening in
April. Supper was just ended, and the soldiers in the post were
collected in groups here and there spinning yarns to pass away the
time, when a Filipino clad only in a loin cloth came down the street
at a steadily swinging run and stopped in front of the sentry. He
brought the announcement that a band of ladrones had just burned a
sugar mill and were advancing to sack a barrio about fifteen miles
away.

The invitation of the commanding officer to go on a "hike" was eagerly
accepted, and, in ten minutes after the message was given, the troops
were on the march followed by two adventurous pedagogues.

Darkness was just closing in as we left the town, but a resplendent
tropic moon soon made the night almost as brilliant as the day. The
trail we followed led over rough and rocky country. Sometimes for a
distance of a mile or more we passed over barren wastes of volcanic
slag poured out in anger by some peak whose convulsions have long
since ceased. Again we would descend into a tropical jungle from the
dense foliage of which the ladrones could have leaped at any moment,
had they known of our coming, and annihilated our little band. We
forded rapid streams with the water at our breasts, and halted only
once in that rapid march of fifteen miles.

About a quarter of a mile from the town we met a man who was standing
guard against a surprise by the ladrones. Nothing could well have been
much more grotesque and nothing could much better illustrate the
absolutely primitive condition of the Filipinos in the interior of the
islands than the appearance of this guard. A pair of knee pants, a
conical grass hat, and a hemp shirt formed his entire apparel. A long
flat wooden shield, a bolo, and a long bamboo spear with a sharp,
flat, iron point, completed his equipment for battle.

Here stood the first and the twentieth centuries side by side. The
Filipino who had advanced only a stage beyond the condition of
primitive man with his knife, spear, and wooden shield, stood side by
side with the American soldier, a representative of modern life with
his magazine rifle, his canteen, his knapsack,--with every article of
his clothing made to give him the highest possible efficiency as the
unit of a military organization.

A few yards farther on we met another guard equipped similarly to the
first. Upon reaching the town, news had just been received that a
detachment of troops from another post had intercepted the ladrones
and fought a skirmish with them. The ladrones had escaped and we set
out in pursuit of them on a chase wilder than a Quixotic dream. We
wound our way into the mountains behind the town, inquiring at every
grass hut we passed whether the band of ladrones had passed that way,
but only once was even a trace of them found. Then it was learned that
at a certain place they had separated into groups of three or four and
gone glimmering through the dream of things that were. This place was
in a secluded nook of the mountains where in years gone by some
adventurous Spaniard had erected a primitive water mill to grind his
sugar-cane. We had now marched about twenty miles and the feet of the
pedagogues were a mass of blisters. They had reached the point where
that form of military maneuvering called "hiking" ceased to possess
any alluring charms. So a native was persuaded to come out of his lone
mountain hut and hitch up his carabao and cart. He was then made to
get on the carabao's back, while the aforesaid pedagogues lay down on
the sugar-cane pulp that had been put into the body of the cart, and
the driver was instructed to start for the post we had left hours
before, and not to stop until he got there. Being uncertain but that
some of the ladrones would learn of our having left the body of troops
and would try the metal of our steel, we at first agreed that neither
of us should go to sleep, but it was later decided that probably the
driver had no greater desire to cross the Styx than his passengers had
and that in case of danger he would awaken us, so both took a revolver
in each hand, stretched out supinely and went to sleep.

Such a sleep! The rough jolting of the cart over an almost impassable
road was never enough to break the spell of slumber. When we awoke the
blazing tropic sun was past the midday mark of morning, shining full
into our unprotected and well-nigh blistered faces.

A pack of dogs were heralding our approach to a little village at the
foot of the mountains where ponies were procured to take us back to
the post.