-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mental bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of internal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
     Women are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of the Nerves at the same
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Depression of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition whereby they favour any Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the condition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Nature, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Perversion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     throwing the whole nervous System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In the first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call the Hypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver,
and other parts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarce knows one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
students, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is also
impossible to trace to a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevalent physiological symptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusements, a love of solitude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and physicians who prescribed popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powders, and
James's fever-powders--as universal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medicine must be directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
destruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no mercurial, no martial
preparation must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). However scientifically correct Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objecting so strongly to them. Less
eccentric was his allegiance to the "Ancients" rather than to the
"Moderns" so far as chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
by chemical rearrangement) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in the search; and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and what we are to fear" (p. 24).

Still more idiosyncratic, perhaps, is Hill's contention (p. 25) that the
air of dry, high grounds worsens the condition of the patient. Virtually
every writer I have read on the subject believed that onset of the hyp
was caused by one of the six non-naturals--air, diet, lack of sufficient
sleep, too little or too much exercise, defective evacuation, the
passions of the mind; and although some medical writers emphasized the
last of these, few would have concurred with Hill that the fetid air
of London was less harmful than the clearer air at Highgate. All readers
of the novel of the period will recall the hypochondriacal Matt
Bramble's tirade against the stench of London air. Beliefs of the
variety here mentioned cause me to question Hill's importance in the
history of medicine; there can be no question about his contributions to
the advancement of the science of botany through popularization of
Linnaeus' system of bisexual classification, but Hill's medical
importance is summarized best as that of a compiler. His recommendation
of the study of botany as a cure for melancholics is sensible but verges
on becoming "a digression in praise of the author," a poetic apologia
pro vita sua in Augustan fashion:
     For me, I should advise above all other things the study of nature.

     Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things; even of
     the utility we are seeking here. This will induce him to walk; and
     every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket, will
     afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
     the air; and continually to change the nature and quality of the
     air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, the heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be
     abroad; and the unceasing variety of the subjects of his
     observation, will prevent his walking hastily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means of his recovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill was forever extolling the claims of a life devoted to the study of
nature, as we see in a late work, The Virtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversion as a cure and more on
the botanic attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every foot-path
side, and thicket."

While Hill's rules and regulations regarding proper diet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Cheyne's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recommendation (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac patient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much space to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extolling this plant, a word should be said about it.

Throughout his life he was an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writer though he was, it was ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made abundantly clear in his correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whether in the small house in St. James's Street or in the
larger one on the Bayswater Road--he cultivated an herb garden that
flattered his knowledge and ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpieces of London. His arrogant
personality alone prevented him from becoming the first Keeper of the
Apothecary's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendent to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardens at Kensington
Palace and at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; over the years Hill produced more than thirty botanical
works, many of them devoted to the medical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbal (1756), On the
Virtues of Sage in Lengthening Human Life (1763), Centaury, the Great
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curing Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising that he
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
medical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authority for
the herbal pacification of an inflamed spleen surprising in the light of
his researches: he was convinced that every illness could be cured by
taking an appropriate herb or combination of herbs. Whereas a few
nonmedical writers--such as John Wesley in Primitive Physick
(1747)--had advocated the taking of one or two herbs in moderate dosage
as anti-hysterics (the eighteenth-century term for all cures of the
hyp), no medical writer of the century ever promoted the use of herbs to
the extent that Hill did. In fairness to him, it is important to note
that his herbal remedies were harmless and that many found their way
into the official London Pharmacopeia. "The virtues of this smooth
Spleen-wort," he insists, "have stood the test of ages; and the plant
every where retained its name and credit: and one of our good
herbarists, who had seen a wonderful case of a swoln spleen, so big, and
hard as to be felt with terror, brought back to a state of nature by it"

(p. 37). The greatest portion of Hill's concluding section combines
advertisement for the powder medicine he was himself manufacturing at a
handsome profit together with a protest against competing apothecaries:
"An intelligent person was directed to go to the medicinal herb shops in
the several markets, and buy some of this Spleen-wort; the name was
written, and shewn to every one; every shop received his money, and
almost every one sold a different plant, under the name of this: but
what is very striking, not one of them the right" (p. 42).

Treatises on hypochondriasis did not cease to be printed after Hill's in
1766, but continued to issue from the presses into the nineteenth
century. A good example of this is the tome by John Reid, physician to
the Finsbury Dispensary in London, Essays on Insanity, Hypochondriasis
and Other Nervous Affections (1816), which summarizes theories of the
malady. A bibliographical study of such works would probably reveal
a larger number of titles in the nineteenth century than in the previous
one, but by this time the nature and definition of hypochondria had
changed significantly.

If John Hill's volume is not an important contribution in the history of
medicine, it is a lucid and brief exposition of many of the best ideas
that had been thought and written on the hyp, with the exception of his
uninhibited prescribing of herbal medicines as cure-alls. An
understanding of this disease is essential for readers of neoclassical
English literature, especially when we reflect upon the fact that some
of the best literature of the period was composed by writers whom it
afflicted. It is perhaps not without significance that the greatest poet
of the Augustan age, Alexander Pope, thought it necessary as he lay on
his deathbed in May 1744 to exclaim with his last breath, "I never was
hippish in my whole life."


CHAPTER: IV


The next day the ghost was very weak and tired. The terrible excitement
of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect. His nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise. For five
days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point
of the blood-stain on the library floor. If the Otis family did not want
it, they clearly did not deserve it. They were evidently people on a
low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating
the symbolic value of sensuous phenomena. The question of phantasmic
apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a
different matter, and really not under his control. It was his solemn
duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large
oriel window on the first and third Wednesdays in every month, and he
did not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations. It is
quite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand,
he was most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.

For the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as
usual between midnight and three o'clock, taking every possible
precaution against being either heard or seen. He removed his boots,
trod as lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large
black velvet cloak, and was careful to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for
oiling his chains. I am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good
deal of difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of
protection. However, one night, while the family were at dinner, he
slipped into Mr. Otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle. He felt a
little humiliated at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see
that there was a great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a
certain degree, it served his purpose. Still in spite of everything he
was not left unmolested. Strings were continually being stretched across
the corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion,
while dressed for the part of "Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley
Woods," he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide,
which the twins had constructed from the entrance of the Tapestry
Chamber to the top of the oak staircase. This last insult so enraged
him, that he resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and
social position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the
next night in his celebrated character of "Reckless Rupert, or the
Headless Earl."

He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in
fact, not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means
of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord
Canterville's grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome
Jack Castletown, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to
marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and
down the terrace at twilight. Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by
Lord Canterville on Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken
heart at Tunbridge Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it
had been a great success. It was, however an extremely difficult
"make-up," if I may use such a theatrical expression in connection with
one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more
scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three
hours to make his preparations. At last everything was ready, and he was
very pleased with his appearance. The big leather riding-boots that went
with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only
find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter-past one he glided out of the wainscoting
and crept down the corridor. On reaching the room occupied by the twins,
which I should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of
the colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar. Wishing to make
an effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water
fell right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his
left shoulder by a couple of inches. At the same moment he heard stifled
shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed. The shock to his
nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he
could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold. The only
thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he
had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences
might have been very serious.

He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in
list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of
draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the
twins. The final blow he received occurred on the 19th of September. He
had gone down-stairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that
there, at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing
himself by making satirical remarks on the large Saroni photographs of
the United States Minister and his wife which had now taken the place of
the Canterville family pictures. He was simply but neatly clad in a long
shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip
of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade. In
fact, he was dressed for the character of "Jonas the Graveless, or the
Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn," one of his most remarkable
impersonations, and one which the Cantervilles had every reason to
remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their
neighbour, Lord Rufford. It was about a quarter-past two o'clock in
the morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring. As
he was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a
dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads,
and shrieked out "BOO!" in his ear.

Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural,
he rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him
there with the big garden-syringe, and being thus hemmed in by his
enemies on every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the
great iron stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to
make his way home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own
room in a terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.

After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition. The twins
lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with
nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the
servants, but it was of no avail. It was quite evident that his feelings
were so wounded that he would not appear. Mr. Otis consequently resumed
his great work on the history of the Democratic Party, on which he had
been engaged for some years; Mrs. Otis organized a wonderful
clam-bake, which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse
euchre, poker, and other American national games, and Virginia rode
about the lanes on her pony, accompanied by the young Duke of Cheshire,
who had come to spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville
Chase. It was generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in
fact, Mr. Otis wrote a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who,
in reply, expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best
congratulations to the Minister's worthy wife.

The Otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the
house, and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let
matters rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the
young Duke of Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord Francis Stilton, had
once bet a hundred guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would play dice
with the Canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the
floor of the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state that, though
he lived on to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but
"Double Sixes." The story was well known at the time, though, of course,
out of respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt
was made to hush it up, and a full account of all the circumstances
connected with it will be found in the third volume of Lord Tattle's
Recollections of the Prince Regent and his Friends. The ghost, then,
was naturally very anxious to show that he had not lost his influence
over the Stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his
own first cousin having been married en secondes noces to the Sieur de
Bulkeley, from whom, as every one knows, the Dukes of Cheshire are
lineally descended. Accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to
Virginia's little lover in his celebrated impersonation of "The Vampire
Monk, or the Bloodless Benedictine," a performance so horrible that when
old Lady Startup saw it, which she did on one fatal New Year's Eve, in
the year 1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which
culminated in violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after
disinheriting the Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and
leaving all her money to her London apothecary. At the last moment,
however, his terror of the twins prevented his leaving his room, and the
little Duke slept in peace under the great feathered canopy in the Royal
Bedchamber, and dreamed of Virginia.


CHAPTER: SECT. II. - Persons Subject to it.


Fatigue of mind, and great exertion of its powers often give birth to
this disease; and always tend to encrease it. The finer spirits are
wasted by the labour of the brain: the Philosopher rises from his study
more exhausted than the Peasant leaves his drudgery; without the benefit
that he has from exercise. Greatness of mind, and steady virtue;
determined resolution, and manly firmness, when put in action, and
intent upon their object, all also lead to it: perhaps whatever tends to
the ennobling of the soul has equal share in bringing on this weakness
of the body.

From this we may learn easily who are the men most subject to it; the
grave and studious, those of a sedate temper and enlarged understanding,
the learned and wise, the virtuous and the valiant: those whom it were
the interest of the world to wish were free from this and every other
illness; and who perhaps, except for this alloy, would have too large a
portion of human happiness.

Though these are most, it is not these alone, who are subject to it.

There are countries where it is endemial, and in other places some have
the seeds of it in their constitution; and in some it takes rise from
accidents. In these last it is the easiest of cure; and in the first
most difficult.

Beside the Greeks already named, the Jews of old time were heavily
afflicted with this disease; and in their descendants to this day it is
often constitutional: the Spaniards have it almost to a man; and so have
the American Indians. Perhaps the character of these several nations may
be connected with it. The steady honour, and firm valour of the
Spaniard, very like that of the ancient Doric nation, who followed the
flute not the trumpet to the field; and met the enemy, not with shouts
and fury, but with a determined virtue: it is the temper of the
Hypochondriac to be slow, but unmoveably resolved: the Jew has shewn
this mistakenly, but almost miraculously; and the poor Indian, untaught
as he is, faces all peril with composure, and sings his death-song with
an unalter'd countenance.

Among particular persons the most inquiring and contemplative are those
who suffer oftenest by this disease; and of all degrees of men I think
the clergy. I do not mean the hunting, shooting, drinking clergy, who
bear the tables of the great; but the retir'd and conscientious; such as
attend in midnight silence to their duty; and seek in their own cool
breasts, or wheresoever else they may be found, new admonitions for an
age plunged in new vices. To this disease we owe the irreparable loss of
Dr. YOUNG; and the present danger of many other the best and most
improved amongst us. May what is here to be proposed assist in their
preservation!

The Geometrician or the learned Philosopher of whatever denomination,
whose course of study fixes his eye for ever on one object, his mind
intensely and continually employed upon one thought, should be warned
also that he is in danger; or if he find himself already afflicted, he
should be told that the same course of life, which brought it on, will,
without due care, encrease it to the most dreaded violence.

The middle period of life is that in which there is the greatest danger
of an attack from this disease; and the latter end of autumn, when the
summer heats have a little time been over, is the season when in our
climate its first assaults are most to be expected. The same time of the
year always increases the disorder in those who have been before
afflicted with it; and it is a truth must be confessed, that from its
first attack the patient grows continually, though slowly, worse; unless
a careful regimen prevent it.

The constitutions most liable to this obstruction are the lean, and dark
complexioned; the grave and sedentary. Let such watch the first
symptoms; and obviate, (as they may with ease) that which it will be
much more difficult to remove.

It is happy a disease, wherein the patient must do a great deal for
himself, falls, for the most part, upon those who have the powers of
reason strongest. Let them only be aware of this, that the distemper
naturally disposes them to inactivity; and reason will have no use
unless accompanied with resolution to enforce it.

Though the physician can do something toward the cure, much more depends
upon the patient; and here his constancy of mind will be employed most
happily. No one is better qualified to judge on a fair hearing what
course is the most fit; and having made that choice, he must with
patience wait its good effects. Diseases that come on slowly must have
time for curing; an attention to the first appearances of the disorder
will be always happiest; because when least established it is easiest
overthrown: but when that happy period has been neglected, he must wait
the effects of such a course as will dilute and melt the obstructing
matter gradually; for till that be done it is not only vain, but
sometimes dangerous, to attempt its expulsion from the body.

The blood easily separates itself into the grosser and the thinner
parts: we see this in bleeding; and from the toughness of the red cake
may guess how very difficult it will be to dissolve a substance of like
firmness in the vessels of the body. That it can thus become thickened
within the body, a Pleurisy shews us too evidently: in that case it is
brought on suddenly, and with inflammation; in this other, slowly and
without; and here, even before it forms the obstruction, can bring on
many mischiefs. Various causes can produce the same effect, but that in
all cases operates most durably, which operates most slowly. The watery
part of the blood is its mild part; in the remaining gross matter of it,
are acrid salts and burning oils, and these, when destitute of that
happy dilution nature gives them in a healthy body, are capable of doing
great mischief to the tender vessels in which they are kept stagnant.


CHAPTER: SECT. III. - The SYMPTOMS of the DISORDER.


The first and lightest of the signs that shew this illness are a lowness
of spirits, and inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusements, a love
of solitude and a habit of thinking, even on trifling subjects, with too
much steadiness. A very little help may combat these: but if that
indolence which is indeed a part of the disorder, will neglect them;
worse must be expected soon to follow.

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness, weight, and oppression in the body,
a want of appetite, or, what is worse, an appetite without digestion;
for these are the conditions of different states of the disease, a
fullness and a difficulty of breathing after meals, a straitness of the
breast, pains and flatulencies in the bowels, and an unaptness to
discharge their contents.

The pulse becomes low, weak, and unequal; and there are frequent
palpitations of the heart, a little dark-coloured urine is voided at
some times; and a flood of colourless and insipid at others; relieving
for a moment, but increasing the distemper: there is in some cases also
a continual teazing cough, with a choaking stoppage in the throat at
times; then heartburn, sickness, hardness of the belly, and a costive
habit, or a tormenting and vain irritation.

The lips turn pale, the eyes loose their brightness and by degrees the
white grows as it were greenish, the gums want their due firmness, with
their proper colour; and an unpleasing foulness grows upon the teeth:
the inside of the mouth is pale and furred, and the throat dry and
husky: the colour of the skin is pale (though there are periods when the
face is florid) and as the obstruction gathers ground, and more affects
the liver, the whole body becomes yellow, tawny, greenish, and at length
of that deep and dusky hue, to which men of swift imagination have given
the name of blackness.

These symptoms do not all appear in any one period of the disease, or in
one case, but at one time or other all of them, as well as those which
follow: the flesh becomes cold to the touch, though the patient does not
himself perceive it; the limbs grow numbed and torpid, the breathing
dull and slow, and the voice hollow; and usually the appetite in this
period declines, and comes almost to nothing: night sweats come on,
black swellings appear on the veins, the flesh wastes and the breast
becomes flat and hollow: the mouth is full of a thin spittle, the head
is dizzy and confus'd, and sometimes there is an unconquerable numbness
in the organs of speech.

I have known the temporary silence that follows upon this last symptom
become a jest to the common herd; and the unhappy patient, instead of
compassion and assistance, receive the reproof of sullenness, from those
who should have known and acted better.

About twenty years ago I met on a visit at Catthorpe in Leicestershire a
young gentleman of distinguished learning and abilities, who at certain
times was speechless. The vulgar thought it a pretence: and a jocose
lady, where he was at tea with company, putting him as she said to a
trial, poured out a dish very strong and without sugar. He drank it and
returned the cup with a bow of great reserve, and his eye bent on the
ground: she then filled the cup with sugar, and pouring weak tea on it,
sent it him: he drank that too, looked at her steadily, and blushed for
her. The lady declared the man was dumb; the rest thought him perverse,
and obstinate; but a constant and steady perseverance in an easy method
cured him.

All these are miseries which the disease, while it retains its natural
form, can bring upon the patient; and thus he will in time be worn out,
and led miserably, though slowly, to the grave. Let him not indulge his
inactivity so far as to give way to this, because it is represented as
far off; the disease may suddenly and frightfully change its nature; and
swifter evils follow.


CHAPTER: VENUS AND MARRIAGE


Back in his beloved Paris again; thrilled by the atmosphere and gaiety
of its merry life; in the full vigour of manhood on the eve of his
thirties; amongst congenial friends; done with the drudgery of winning
to Academic honour, Boucher saw that the public were not falling over
each other to purchase religious or historic pictures; he straightway
turned his back upon these things, and on the edge of his thirtieth
year he gave to the world his "Marriage of the Children of God with
the Children of Men," in which Venus is the avowed mistress of his
adoration. It caused a fine stir, and greatly increased his repute.

In this picture he ends his Italian period and strikes his own
personal note. Both this and the "Venus asking arms for Aeneas from
Vulcan," together with the "Birth of Adonis" and the "Death of
Adonis," of about the same period, still show Boucher strongly under
the influence of his master, Lemoyne. Indeed, the "Birth" and "Death
of Adonis," their record lost during the scuffle and confusion of the
Revolution, for long hung side by side as pictures by Lemoyne, until,
being cleaned about 1860, Boucher's initials were discovered upon
them, and, contemporary engravings being hunted up, still further
proved their origin. But in the Venus that now figures in all his
works there is that flesh-painting of the nude, and that rosy touch
upon the flesh of the female figure, that are a far more certain
signature of Boucher's handiwork than any written name.

Unfortunately the Salons were closed during Boucher's earlier years
until he was thirty-four, and the record of his work during these
years is difficult to follow; but with his service to Venus his
personal career begins, and the stream of his Venus-pieces steadily
flows from his hands.

He came to her service rid of all prentice essays in craftsmanship, a
finished and consummate artist. He found in his subject a goddess to
whom he could devote his great and splendid gifts. He painted her
dainty body with a radiant delight and a rare colour-sense such as
France had never before seen or uttered. He remains to this day the
first painter of the subtle, delicate, and elusive thing that is
femininity; he caught her allure, her charm, as he was to catch the
fragrance and charm of children and flowers; and he set the statement
of these things upon canvas as they have never been uttered.

The whole of his life long, Boucher gave himself up with equal and
passionate devotion to work and to pleasure--working at his easel
often twelve hours of his day without losing, to the end when the
brush fell from his dead fingers, his blitheness of heart or his
generosity of act, and without weakening the pleasure-loving desires
of his gadding spirit. Out of his splendid toil he made the means to
indulge his tastes for pleasure; and the gratifying of his tastes in
turn renewed and created the ideas that made the subjects of his
artistry. He brought to all he did a joy in the doing that made of his
vast labour one long pleasure--of his pleasures a riot of industry. He
played as he toiled, scarce knowing which was play and which toil.

The gossip of his love-affairs makes no romantic story--they were but
commonplace ecstasies with unknown frail women. But hard as he worked
and lived and played, he found time to get himself married in his
thirtieth year to pretty seventeen-year-old Marie Jeanne Buseau, a
little Parisian--and for love of her, so far as he understood the
business; for she brought him no dowry.

The young couple settled down for the next ten years in the Rue
Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. Here Boucher lived through his thirties.

Madame was a pretty creature, if we had but Latour's pastel portrait
alone to prove it. But the pretty features were the crown to as pretty
a body, for she sat often to her lord; and it is clear from his
correspondence with a friend, Bachaumont, that she is the Psyche of
his illustrated fable--and Psyche runs much to the Altogether.

Marriage, however, was not likely to imprison Boucher's gadding eyes;
and it did not. Madame Boucher seems to have had as frail a heart, and
avoided strife by amusing herself, amongst others, with the Swedish
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who, to gain access to the lady,
commissioned Boucher to do the Watteau-like illustrations to
Acajou--a dull affair. Boucher's pretty wife, herself no mean
artist, worked in his studio, and painted several smaller canvases
after his pictures, gaining some fame as a miniaturist and engraver.

Nor did Marriage turn Boucher from his art. Two years were gone by
since his nomination to the Academy; he had now to paint the formal
Historical Picture and present it in order to take his seat as
Academician; and it was in this his thirtieth year that he painted and
won his academic rank with the "Renauld et Armide" now at the Louvre.

Here he sufficiently subordinated his own style to the academic to
ensure success; and the work was hailed by Academicians and critics,
including Diderot, with enthusiasm. But even here we have his cupids
peeping round the mythologic event; and Armide herself has pretty
French lips that knew no Greek.

Once secure of his position, he straightway flung the last remnants of
the academic style out of his studio door; and it is a grim comment on
criticism that it was just exactly in proportion as he developed his
own personal genius and uttered the France of his day, that he was
attacked; whilst the stilted things that he knew were third-rate, and
which he wholly rejected from henceforth, were exactly the things that
were praised!

His election to the Academy, and the enthusiasm over the picture that
won him his seat thereat, brought his name before the young king; the
following year he received his first order from the Court whose
painter he was destined to become. The decorations in the queen's
apartments were gloomy and had grown black; and he painted in their
stead the "Charity," "Abundance," "Fidelity," and "Prudence" still
there to be seen. Indeed, with his gay vision, his pretty habit of
culling only the flowers from the garden of life, and his quickness to
set down the pleasing thing in every prospect, Boucher was the
destined painter of a Court weary of pomposity and the pose of the
mock-heroic, and which was wholly giving itself up to pleasure and the
elegances.

But neither his new dignity of Academician nor the royal favour, kept
him from the bookshops; and he illustrated, with rare beauty and a
charm worthy of Watteau, the great edition of the Works of Molière
in his thirty-first year. It is true that he made as free with
Molière's world as with the Gods of Olympus; he peoples the plays with
characters of his own day, arrayed in the dress and habit of that day,
and moving in surroundings that he saw about him.


LE MONDE QUI S'AMUSE


The Homely had come upon the town out of Holland, painted with most
consummate artistry by Chardin, and was soon in the vogue. Boucher had
a quick eye for the mode. And he straightway set himself to the
painting of "La Belle Cuisinière." Still-life and homely subjects need
an accuracy of realism and a Dutch sense of these things, a sense of
sincerity and an appreciation of the dignity of the work-a-day life of
the people, in which Boucher was wholly lacking. Above all, it calls
for a sense of "character," which, in Boucher, was always weak. It was
a sneer against him that his very broomsticks called for pompons and
ribbons--and there was more than a little truth in the spite. He is
more concerned with the accident of the kissing of a kitchen-maid than
with the kitchen's habit. He cannot even peep into a scullery without
dragging in Venus by the skirts, and tricking her out in a
property-wardrobe of a scullery-wench, in which the girl is clearly
but acting the part.

However, these passing vogues and experiments in different methods
were only gay asides--he was working the while upon his own subjects;
and, to the display by its several members ordered by the Academy, he
sent four little paintings of fauns and cupids which won him the
honour of election as deputy-professor. His brain and hand were very
busy, and he turns from one thing to another with amazing facility,
bringing distinction to all that he does.

But he painted about this time two pictures of infants, "L'Amour
Oiseleur" and "L'Amour Moissonneur," which were the beginning of that
host of cupids that he let fly from his studio; they frolic across his
canvases and join the retinue of Venus, peeping out from clouds, over
waves, round curtains, painted with a perfection that has never been
surpassed in the portrayal of infants. He painted their round limbs,
their lusty life, their delightful awkwardnesses, their jolly fat
grace, their naïve surprise at life and glory in it, as they had never
been painted before, and have never been painted since.

He also gave forth in this his thirty-third year a "Pastoral" and a
"Shepherd and Shepherdess in Conversation," with sheep about them and
in a pleasant landscape, which were his first essays in the style that
he created and which made him famous.

His friend Meissonnier, the inventor of the rococo, stood godfather to
Boucher's first-born son in the May of 1736.

From the very beginning Boucher seems to have been engraved. And these
engravings, done by the best gravers of his day, greatly extended his
reputation and popularised him; he fully realised the value of the
advertisement as well as his profits from it. Before his thirty-third
year was run out he published his well-known "Cries of Paris."

Boucher's description of them, "studies from the low classes," holds
the key to that something of failure to realise the dramatic verities
that is over all; it gives also the attitude of the France that he
knew towards the France that he did not, and could not understand. He
created that dainty, pleasant atmosphere that comes floating up to the
windows on a fresh morning in Paris from the musical cries of
the street vendors; but of the deeper significance of the
street-sellers--of the miserable accent in their life, of their weary
toil, of the dignity of their labour--he knew nothing; his brush could
not refrain from making elegance and fine manners peep from behind the
street-porter's fustian or the milkmaid's skirt.

But his thirty-third year was to contain a more far-reaching
significance even than the creation of his cupid-pieces and pastorals.

The "Cries of Paris" were scarce printed when Boucher's illustration
to "Don Quixote" appeared--"Sancho pursued by the servants of the
Duke." This design was to have far-reaching results that Boucher
little suspected.

The painter Oudry had been called to the conduct of the great tapestry
looms at Beauvais a couple of years before; and in his efforts to
furnish the looms with good designs, he now called Boucher to his aid,
whose original and fresh style, colour, and arrangement, together with
his personal vision, and the enthusiasm and zeal with which he threw
himself into the work, at once increased the reputation and the
products of the famous looms. This large designing for the tapestries
was, in return, of immense value to the development of the genius of
the man, enlarging his breadth of style and giving scope to that great
decorative sense that was his superb gift. Thenceforth he was destined
to play a supreme part in the history of the world-famed factories. He
now produced painting after painting for the Beauvais looms.

Life is now one long triumph for Boucher, only disturbed in this year
by the sad news of the suicide of his old master, Lemoyne. It was in
this, Boucher's thirty-fourth year, that the Salon was opened for the
first time since Boucher's infancy, and he contributed several
canvases to it.

Rigaud, the old Academician, now close upon eighty, straggling through
the great galleries, might well blink and gasp at the change that had
come over French art since he last exhibited there, thirty-three years
gone by; but his scoffs and regrets held no terrors for the younger
Academicians gathered about. He stood in a new world. A new generation
was in possession. The grand manner, the severe etiquette, formal
mock-heroics, and solemn pomposity of Louis the Fourteenth were
vanished, and the Agreeable and the Pleasant Make-Believe of Louis the
Fifteenth reigned in their stead. Old Rigaud might blink indeed! Just
as the imposing and stilted etiquette of the reception-room had given
place to the easy manners and airy etiquette of the dainty boudoir, so
had light chatter and gay wit and the quick repartee usurped the heavy
splendours of a consequential age. France, weary of an eternal pose of
the grand manner, was seeking change in joyousness and amusement.

Gallantry and gaiety were become the object of the ambition of a
dandified and elegant day. France became a coquette; dressed herself
as a porcelain shepherdess; and with beribboned crook and sheep,
seeking pleasant prospects to stroll through, gave herself to
dalliance--her powder-puff and patch-box and fan a serious part of her
unseriousness.


CHAPTER: SECT. V. - The Causes of the HYPOCHONDRIASIS.


The obstruction which forms this disease, may take its origin from
different accidents: a fever ill cured has often caused it; or the
piles, which had been used to discharge largely, ceasing; a marshy soil,
poisoned with stagnant water, has given it to some persons; and altho'
indolence and inactivity are oftenest at the root, yet it has arisen
from too great exercise.

Real grief has often brought it on; and even love, for sometimes that is
real. Study and fixed attention of the mind have been accused before;
and add to these the stooping posture of the body, which most men use,
though none should use it, in writing and in reading. This has
contributed too much to it; but of all other things night studies are
the most destructive. The steady stillness, and dusky habit of all
nature in those hours, enforce, encourage, and support that settled
gloom, which rises from fixt thought; and sinks the body to the grave;
even while it carries up the mind to heaven. He who would have his lamp
        At midnight hour
  Be seen in some high lonely tower,
will waste the flame of this unheeded life: and while he labours to
unsphere the spirit of Plato will let loose his own.


CHAPTER: SECT. VI. - The Cure of the HYPOCHONDRIASIS.


Let him who would escape the mischiefs of an obstructed spleen, avoid
the things here named: and let him who suffers from the malady,
endeavour to remember to which of them it has been owing; for half the
hope depends upon that knowledge.

Nature has sometimes made a cure herself, and we should watch her ways;
for art never is so right as when it imitates her: sometimes the
patient's own resolution has set him free. This is always in his power,
and at all times will do wonders.

The bleeding of the piles, from nature's single efforts, has at once
cured a miserable man; where their cessation was the cause of the
disorder. A leprosy has appeared upon the skin, and all the symptoms of
the former sickness vanished. This among the Jews happened often: both
diseases we know were common among them: and I have here seen something
very like it: Water-Dock has thrown out scorbutic eruptions, and all the
former symptoms of an Hypochondriacal disorder have disappeared:
returning indeed when these were unadvisedly struck in; but keeping off
entirely when they were better treated. A natural purging unsuppressed
has sometimes done the same good office: but this is hazardous.

It is easy to be directed from such instances; only let us take the
whole along with us. Bleeding would have answered nature's purpose, if
she could not have opened of herself the hæmorrhoidal vessels; but he
who should give medicines for that purpose, might destroy his patient by
too great disturbance. If a natural looseness may perform the cure, so
may an artificial; when the original source of the disorder points that
way. But these are helps that take place only in particular cases.

The general and universal method of cure must be by some mild and gently
resolving medicine, under the influence of which the obstructing matter
may be voided that, or some other way with safety. The best season to
undertake this is the autumn, but even here there must be caution.

In the first place, no strong evacuating remedy must be given; for that,
by carrying off the thinner parts of the juices, will tend to thicken
the remainder; and certainly encrease the distemper. No acrid medicine
must be directed, for that may act too hastily, dissolve the impacted
matter at once, and let it loose, to the destruction of the sufferer; no
antimonial, no mercurial, no martial preparation must be taken; in
short, no chymistry: nature is the shop that heaven has set before us,
and we must seek our medicine there. The venerable ancients, who knew
not this new art, will lead us in the search; and (faithful relators as
they are of truth) will tell us whence we may deduce our hope; and what
we are to fear.

But prior to the course of any medicine, and as an essential to any good
hope from it, the patient must prescribe himself a proper course of
life, and a well chosen diet: let us assist him in his choice; and speak
of this first, as it comes first in order.


CHAPTER: SECT. VI. - Rules of Life for Hypochondriac Persons.


Air and exercise, as they are the best preservers of health, and
greatest assistants in the cure of all long continued diseases, will
have their full effect in this; but there requires some caution in the
choice, and management of them. It is common to think the air of high
grounds best; but experience near home shews otherwise: the
Hypochondriac patient is always worse at Highgate even than in London.

The air he breathes should be temperate; not exposed to the utmost
violences of heat and cold, and the swift changes from one to the
other; which are most felt on those high grounds. The side of a hill is
the best place for him: and though wet grounds are hurtful; yet let
there be the shade of trees, to tempt him often to a walk; and soften by
their exhalation the over dryness of the air.

The exercise he takes should be frequent; but not violent. Motion
preserves the firmness of the parts, and elasticity of the vessels; it
prevents that aggregation of thick humours which he is most to fear. A
sedentary life always produces weakness, and that mischief always
follows: weak eyes are gummy, weak lungs are clogged with phlegm, and
weak bowels waste themselves in vapid diarrhoeas.

Let him invite himself abroad, and let his friends invite him by every
innocent inducement. For me, I should advise above all other things the
study of nature. Let him begin with plants: he will here find a
continual pleasure, and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful
things; even of the utility we are seeking here. This will induce him to
walk; and every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket,
will afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually
in the air, and continually to change the nature and quality of the air,
by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the lawn, the
heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be abroad; and the
unceasing variety of the subjects of his observation, will prevent his
walking hastily: he will pursue his studies in the air; and that
contemplative turn of mind, which in his closet threatened his
destruction, will thus become the great means of his recovery.

If the mind tire upon this, from the repeated use, another of nature's
kingdoms opens itself at once upon him; the plant he is weary of
observing, feeds some insect he may examine; nor is there a stone that
lies before his foot, but may afford instruction and amusement.

Even what the vulgar call the most abject things will shew a wonderful
utility; and lead the mind, in pious contemplation higher than the
stars. The poorest moss that is trampled under foot, has its important
uses: is it at the bottom of a wood we find it? why there it shelters
the fallen seeds; hides them from birds, and covers them from frost;
and thus becomes the foster father of another forest! creeps it along
the surface of a rock? even there its good is infinite! its small roots
run into the stone, and the rains make their way after them; the moss
having lived its time dies; it rots and with the mouldered fragments of
the stone forms earth; wherein, after a few successions, useful plants
may grow, and feed more useful cattle!

Is there a weed more humble in its aspect, more trampled on, or more
despised than knot grass! no art can get the better of its growth, no
labour can destroy it; 'twere pity if they could, for the thing lives
where nothing would of use to us; and its large and most wonderfully
abundant seeds, feed in hard winters, half the birds of Heaven.

What the weak moss performs upon the rock the loathed toadstool brings
about in timber: is an oak dead where man's eye will not find it? this
fungus roots itself upon the bark, and rots the wood beneath it; hither
the beetle creeps for shelter, and for sustenance; him the woodpecker
follows as his prey; and while he tears the tree in search of him, he
scatters it about the ground; which it manures.

Nor is it the beetle alone that thus insinuates itself into the
substance of the vegetable tribe: the tender aphide, whom a touch
destroys, burrows between the two skins of a leaf, for shelter from his
winged enemies; tracing, with more than Dedalæan art, his various
meanders; and veining the green surface with these white lines more
beautifully than the best Ægyptian marble.

'Twere endless to proceed; nor is it needful: one object will not fail
to lead on to another, and every where the goodness of his God will
shine before him even in what are thought the vilest things; his
greatness in the lead of them.

Let him pursue these thoughts, and seek abroad the objects and the
instigations to them: but let him in these and all other excursions
avoid equally the dews of early morning, and of evening.

The more than usual exercise of this prescription will dispose him to
more than customary sleep, let him indulge it freely; so far from
hurting, it will help his cure.

Let him avoid all excesses: drink need scarce be named, for we are
writing to men of better and of nobler minds, than can be tempted to
that humiliating vice. Those who in this disorder have too great an
appetite, must not indulge it; much eaten was never well digested: but
of all excesses the most fatal in this case is that of venery. It is the
excess we speak of.


CHAPTER: SECT. VII. - The proper DIET.


In the first place acids must be avoided carefully; and all things that
are in a state of fermentation, for they will breed acidity. Provisions
hardened by salting never should be tasted; much less those cured by
smoaking, and by salting. Bacon is indigestible in an Hypochondriac
stomach; and hams, impregnated as is now the custom, with acid fumes
from the wood fires over which they are hung, have that additional
mischief.

Milk ought to be a great article in the diet: and even in this there
should be choice. The milk of grass-fed cows has its true quality: no
other. There are a multitude of ways in which this may be made a part
both of our foods and drinks, and they should all be used.

The great and general caution is that the diet be at all times of a kind
loosening and gently stimulating; light but not acrid. Veal, lamb,
fowls, lobsters, crabs, craw-fish, fresh water fish and mutton broth,
with plenty of boiled vegetables, are always right; and give enough
variety.

Raw vegetables are all bad: sour wines, old cheese, and bottled beer are
things never to be once tasted. Indeed much wine is wrong, be it of what
kind soever. It is the first of cordials; and as such I would have it
taken in this disease when it is wanted: plainly as a medicine, rather
than a part of diet. Malt liquor carefully chosen is certainly the best
drink. This must be neither new, nor tending to sourness; perfectly
clear, and of a moderate strength: it is the native liquor of our
country, and the most healthful.

Too much tea weakens; and even sugar is in this disorder hurtful: but
honey may supply its place in most things; and this is not only harmless
but medicinal; a very powerful dissolvent of impacted humours, and a
great deobstruent.

What wine is drank should be of some of the sweet kinds. Old Hock has
been found on enquiry to yield more than ten times the acid of the sweet
wines; and in red Port, at least in what we are content to call so,
there is an astringent quality, that is most mischievous in these cases:
it is said there is often alum in it: how pregnant with mischief that
must be to persons whose bowels require to be kept open, is most
evident. Summer fruits perfectly ripe are not only harmless but
medicinal; but if eaten unripe they will be very prejudicial. A light
supper, which will leave an appetite for a milk breakfast, is always
right; this will not let the stomach be ravenous for dinner, as it is
apt to be in those who make that their only meal.

One caution more must be given, and it may seem a strange one: it is
that the patient attend regularly to his hours of eating. We have to do
with men for the most part whose soul is the great object of their
regard; but let them not forget they have a body.

The late Dr. STUKELY has told me, that one day by appointment visiting
Sir ISAAC NEWTON, the servant told him, he was in his study. No one was
permitted to disturb him there; but as it was near dinner time, the
visitor sat down to wait for him. After a time dinner was brought in; a
boil'd chicken under a cover. An hour pass'd, and Sir ISAAC did not
appear. The doctor eat the fowl, and covering up the empty dish, bad
them dress their master another. Before that was ready, the great man
came down; he apologiz'd for his delay, and added, "give me but leave to
take my short dinner, and I shall be at your service; I am fatigued and
faint." Saying this, he lifted up the cover; and without any emotion,
turned about to STUKELY with a smile; "See says he, what we studious
people are, I forgot I had din'd."


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VII. - THE FILIPINO AT HOME.


As one enters a Filipino sitting-room for the first time, there is one
feature in the arrangement of the furniture that impresses itself upon
him at once, and it may be stated without fear of serious
contradiction that this same peculiar feature in its arrangement will
continue to face him, as he enters different homes, about as certainly
as he crosses the threshold.

The arrangement referred to is that of one large mirror, one settee,
and some ten or a dozen chairs that appear to have had a certain
orderly affection for one another. The mirror is hung upon one of the
large interior parts of the house about four feet above the floor. The
wooden houses in the Philippines are built by setting large posts
upright into the ground, extending into the air from twenty to thirty
feet. Cross timbers are fastened to these upright posts about eight or
ten feet above the ground and then not sawed off even with the posts,
but allowed to extend beyond them each way. The framework of the house
is built upon these extending cross timbers, a style of building by
which these large upright posts are left standing out on the inside of
the room from one to three feet from the walls. It is on that one of
these posts most nearly opposite the door that the mirror always finds
its place. Immediately beneath the mirror is the settee; and the
chairs are arranged in two parallel lines facing one another and at
right angles with the ends of the settee. However odd this arrangement
may appear to one when he first enters a Filipino drawing-room, there
are two things to be said in its favor. In the first place, it places
you face to face with the person with whom you are conversing so that
you can watch him,--a matter of no small moment in the Philippines. In
the next place, it enables you to give one of the young ladies a
sheep's-eye in the mirror while the others present are left where
Moses was in our much abused conundrum.

The size of the residence and the quality of its furnishings depends
upon the wealth of the owner. But there is so vast a difference
between the mode of life of the highest class and the tao, or lowest
class, that it is well to speak of them separately, and the great
middle class of Filipinos can easily be imagined to occupy the
intervening ground.

The rich Filipino's house is usually of wood built upon a wall of
stone or brick from ten to fifteen feet high. The floors are kept
highly polished in his hallway, dressing-room, and bed-rooms. There
are, of course, no fire-places in any of the rooms, but on some
occasions something is needed to dry the rain-soaked atmosphere, for
even in the dry season it has been seen to rain for five successive
days and nights without the cessation of a moment.

A long chain of dependents is attached to the household of the rich
Filipino. The master has his special body servant to be present at all
times to do his master's bidding, in short, to be the visible
mechanism of his master's volition. So, too, the lady of the house has
her servant woman to do the slightest bidding of her ladyship. Then
there is the cook who is almost invariably a man, a house boy or two,
and the coachman. These functionaries, with their assistants and
assistants to the assistants, together with a servant or two for the
exclusive service of the children, complete the economic household.

Such a family has an abundance of rice and wheat bread, also of
chicken and fish with occasional fresh beef. They have also a good
deal of dulce. They regularly serve wine and frequently serve beer
on their tables.

In strong contrast with this mode of life is that of the tao. His
diet consists almost wholly of rice and small uncleaned fish boiled
together. As a rule knife, fork, plate, and spoon find no place in his
household. The rice and fish are boiled in a pot and then allowed to
cool in the same vessel or poured out to cool in a large earthen or
wooden bowl. Then Mr. Tao together with Mrs. Tao and all the young
Taos squat on their heels around the mixture and satisfy that
intangible thing called the appetite. They do not use chop sticks as
the Chinese do, but the rice and fish are caught in a hollow formed by
the first three fingers of the right hand. The thumb is then placed
behind the mass. It is raised up and poised before the mouth, with a
skill coming from the evolution of ages, when a contraction of the
muscles of the thumb throws the mass into the mouth with a skill that
is marvelous to any but a Filipino. To judge from the most reliable
information, the poorest class do not have an abundance of food,
although it would seem that such a condition of things would be
well-nigh impossible. However, in a census of one hundred school
children there were found six boys and four girls who declared that
they had never had enough to eat, and the native teacher stated that
this was probably true.

The wide gulf between the tao and the rich man is filled by the
great middle class of Filipinos.