-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - ADORATION.


THUS far I have examined into the teaching of the Church of England with
reference to nothing but the bare doctrine of transubstantiation, or, as
it is now more frequently called, of the real objective presence of the
body and blood of our blessed Saviour in the consecrated elements of
bread and wine.  I have not discussed the question whether the elements
of bread and wine remain either in their substance or their accidents,
for these questions are not discussed by the Church of England.  The
point maintained by the Church is that the most precious body and blood
of Christ are not in the bread and wine at all, but are given by the
direct action of the Holy Ghost to the soul of the believer, and received
by him through faith.  But we cannot leave the subject there, for, as we
are taught in the twenty-eighth Article, that doctrine ‘has given
occasion to many superstitions,’ and to two of these, adoration and
sacrifice, we must, if we would gather the real teaching of the Church of
England, direct our careful study.

Adoration.—When we speak of adoration, let it not be for one moment
supposed that we refer to the adoration of the Lord Jesus, as now seated
at the right hand of God, for with the whole heart, and the most profound
reverence, we would fall at His feet, and say, in the language of our
Communion Service, ‘Thou only art Holy, Thou only art the Lord; Thou
only, O Christ, art most high in the glory of God the Father.’  The
adoration against which we protest is the adoration of the Lord Jesus
Christ as supposed to be localised in the consecrated elements of bread
and wine.  Such adoration must, of course, involve the belief that He, as
a living Lord, is actually present in each piece of consecrated bread,
and also in the consecrated wine, and for such a belief there is not one
word in Scripture.  The doctrines of transubstantiation and
consubstantiation are made to rest on what is called the literal
interpretation of the words, ‘This is My body,’ ‘This is My blood;’ but
the utter inconsistency of the whole system is shown by the fact that
while its advocates maintain that these words must be taken literally,
and that their doctrine of the real presence is the necessary
consequence, they themselves completely depart from their own principle
of literal interpretation, and make a bold assertion which the words,
taken literally, distinctly contradict.  The words taken literally could
certainly teach nothing more than that the bread becomes the body, and
the wine the blood of our blessed Redeemer; but Rome teaches, and as far
as I can learn the modern Ritualists teach the same, that not only do the
bread and wine each separately become the body and blood, but that each
of them becomes by the act of consecration a complete living Saviour,
with Body, Soul, and Divinity; so that there is a living Saviour in each
piece of consecrated bread, and a living Saviour in the cup, and that
these living Saviours are to be adored or worshipped with the same
worship as is given to our blessed Redeemer at the right hand of the
throne in Heaven.  I could give scores of passages in proof of my
statement; but the well-known words of Mr. Bennett are sufficient: ‘I am
one of those who have lighted candles at the altar in the day-time, who
use incense at the holy sacrifice—who use the Eucharistic vestments—who
elevate the blessed Sacrament—who myself adore, and teach the people to
adore, the consecrated elements, believing Christ to be in them—believing
that under their veil is the sacred body and blood of my Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.’  Such is the fabric raised on what is called the literal
interpretation of the words of our blessed Saviour, a fabric for which
those words taken literally give no foundation of any kind whatever.  But
how is it with the Church of England?  Are men true Churchmen when they
elevate the elements for worship?  Are they teaching the doctrines of the
Church of England when they teach that we are to worship the living Lord
in the bread and in the cup which the priest raises above his head for
adoration?  It certainly does not seem as if they were, for as far as I
have been able to discover, not one word from all our Church’s documents
is ever quoted in support of the practice.  The only position taken up is
that it is not expressly forbidden, and this position I believe to be,
like the rest of the system, without foundation.  It is quite true that
comparatively little is said, for the doctrine of transubstantiation
being denied and disproved, all the rest follows as a matter of course.

If there is no real objective presence there can be no adoration.  If a
living Saviour be not in the elements He cannot therein be adored.  The
whole controversy turns on the doctrine of the Real Presence as the
key-stone of the system.  But though the subject has not been so fully
discussed in our Church documents, there is quite enough to show very
clearly the mind of the Church of England.  The concluding words of
Article xxviii. are quite enough to settle the question: ‘The Sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper was not by Christ’s ordinance reserved, carried
about, lifted up, or worshipped.’  How, with that Article before them,
clergymen of the Church of England can presume to elevate the sacramental
elements for worship I am at a loss to explain.  But this is not all that
has been said, for the practice of kneeling at the Lord’s Supper
occasioned at one time a certain amount of anxiety in the minds of some
persons, as they feared that it might be mistaken for adoration of the
host.  To prevent the possibility of any such mistake a most important
note was added in the year 1552, which, after having been omitted in
1559, was restored with a slight alteration in 1662.  It is as follows:
‘It is hereby declared, that thereby no adoration is intended, or ought
to be done, either unto the sacramental bread or wine there bodily
received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ’s natural flesh and
blood.  The sacramental bread and wine remain still in their very natural
substances, and, therefore, may not be adored (for that were idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians); and the natural body and blood
of our Saviour Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the
truth of Christ’s natural body to be at one time in more places than
one.’  Such words as those need no comment, and I should be only wasting
time if I were to stop to discuss them.  Of course people endeavour to
evade them; but the attempts at evasion only tend to show the utter
helplessness of the undertaking.  The memorialists already referred to,
say, ‘We repudiate all adoration of a corporal presence of Christ’s
natural flesh and blood, that is to say, of the presence of His body and
blood as they are in Heaven.’  They admit it, therefore, in some other
way.  But the Church of England denies it altogether.  It draws no nice
distinction as to the mode, but simply denies the fact, and settles the
question once and for ever for all honest men whose honest desire it is
to teach its doctrines and adopt its worship.

But as we really desire to ascertain the truth, it is well to refer to
the statements of those who differ from us.  I turn, therefore, to those
of Dr. Pusey, as I believe he is the person who above all others would be
regarded as the best exponent of the theory of the Real Presence and its
consequences.  In his book, The Real Presence, p. 311, he says: ‘The
Church of England has maintained the same reserve as to the practice of
adoring our Lord present in the Eucharist.’  And again: ‘With regard to
the adoration we are rather told that the Sacraments were not ordained of
Christ to be adored, but to be received.’  I could not wish for a plainer
statement of truth than those last words, but I confess myself at a loss
to understand how the writer can teach adoration, and yet continue in his
position as a clergyman of the Church of England.  But with the former
words I cannot agree, for the Church of England has not exercised
reserve.  To exercise reserve is to keep in the background a truth which
we believe, but which from motives of expediency we think it better not
to make known.  But there is no such reserve in the Church of England.

She is plain, honest, and outspoken for the truth; and when she struck
all trace of adoration from her worship she did so, not from any crafty
policy of reserve, but because she believed that the whole thing was a
gross superstition, and with a firm, bold, and unsparing hand she cut
away the whole fabric, and left no trace of it in the whole system of her
worship.  There was no reserve in the Reformers, whatever there may be in
those who are striving to undo the Reformation.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean François Millet was born on October 4, 1814, that is at the
period when French art, at any rate as far as landscape painting is
concerned, had reached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighteenth
century the landscape painter had been hard put to make a living. The
taste of connoisseurs throughout the century had been for portraits
and interiors, or for those numerous pastoral subjects which were
carried out with so much decorative charm by such men as Watteau and
Boucher. Such landscape painting as existed was of the type
popularised by Vernet; it was built upon a curious mixture of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvator Rosa. The only evidence of
revolt against such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Moreau. These two, and more especially would I direct the
reader's attention to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
conventionalities of the time. They endeavoured to infuse some sense
of atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trees
and figures are painfully formal, they yet stand alone in the French
school as the pioneers of a phase of art which was to attain its
zenith in the middle of the nineteenth century.

But after the Revolution, and during the whole of the time that France
was under the domination of Napoleon, very rigid principles indeed
were enforced with regard to the direction that art should take. The
innovation which had its commencement in the reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything before it as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
dominated the whole French school, and no artist, however great his
reputation, attempted for many years to swim against the stream. In
spite of the principles of liberty and equality which were claimed for
all under the new régime, a terribly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which might break out in the form of a naturalistic art.

The directors of this new movement failed to see that the conditions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremacy was due to the fact that their
productions were symbolical of the loftiest thoughts of their own
epoch. The art which expresses the ambitions and noblest thoughts of
its time will alone endure. These expressions are not applicable to
any other condition than those which called them forth, and hence in
attempting to purify the rococo which had existed up to the middle of
the eighteenth century, by a return to classical traditions, they were
only copying that which their predecessors had done, and in so doing
left us without any original expression of their own time.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millet born, and he was numbered
amongst that little band of men which included Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diaz, and Daumier, who were to lay the foundations of the modern
naturalistic school. At the outset it was seemingly a hopeless
struggle they undertook; a struggle against prejudice and influence
which was only to be brought to a victorious culmination after years
of struggle and disappointment. Of this little band, Millet was
perhaps the best equipped for the privations which were necessary. He
came of a peasant stock who inhabited Gruchy, a small village
situated in the commune of Gréville, close to Cherbourg. Grouped
underneath the humble roof was the grandmother, who had been left a
widow fifteen years before; her son, Jean Louis Nicolas Millet, and
his wife and eight children, of which our artist was the second. His
grandmother appears to have been a pious old lady, whose chief delight
was in her grandchildren, to whom she taught those religious
principles which stood them in good stead in after life. We are told
that Millet's father possessed a force of character one does not often
find amongst men in his rank of life. He was of a contemplative
disposition, and had a keenly developed feeling for natural beauty. He
possessed moreover a keen appreciation of music, which unfortunately
he does not appear to have had much opportunity of cultivating. His
wife was an excellent housewife and of a religious turn of mind. The
house they occupied, situated quite a short distance from the sea, was
placed in a tract of country which, whilst it had rugged and
picturesque features, was not of a nature which would yield
extraordinary results under cultivation. It was, therefore, a hard
struggle for existence which Millet in his first years saw going
on around him. Not that the family were any the less happy for having
to work laboriously for their livelihood. They had been brought up
amidst such surroundings; their wants were simple and easily
gratified, and the tranquillity of the ménage more than
counterbalanced those doubtful luxuries which easier circumstances
would have brought their way. Throughout his life Millet maintained
the extreme simplicity he had seen practised in the home of his
childhood, and long years afterwards he was accustomed to look back
with pleasureable memories upon his early years.

Gruchy, situated in one of the wildest parts of Normandy, feels the
full effect of every storm which blows up from the Atlantic. There is
nothing to shelter the exposed hamlets studded along the coast from
the fury of the western gale, and the rocks are but too often strewn
with the wrecks of vessels which have come to grief in that terrible
sea. Millet in his youth must have witnessed many of these
catastrophes. Quite a number of drawings by him are extant
representing succour being extended to some vessel in difficulties, or
the hauling up of some wreckage on to the rocks. The studious boy
must have been impressed as he saw the sternness of the combat in his
native country between men and nature; the wind-swept fields, and
hills bare to the point of savageness. The very trees themselves
dwarfed and gnarled; in their struggle with the elements they have
been made tough and hardy as the inhabitants of the country
themselves, and, stunted as they are, yet show well that they can
resist the force of the fiercest storm. The brooding and contemplative
character of the father having descended to the son, we can quite
imagine the effect such surroundings would have upon him. As he looked
back in after years upon his roamings in his native country, he
appreciated the awe-inspiring character of the scenery in which he had
been born. He would doubtless recall many a walk amidst the fields
with the wind blowing in his face as it rushed in from the Atlantic,
the rain beating hard upon the freshly ploughed fields, and the
distant figure of the ploughman struggling hard with his team against
the stiff sou'wester. The great mass of vapour overhead whirled before
the violence of the storm, casting grey and pearly light over the
whole scene, whilst far away on the top of the hill a clump of trees,
bent with their resistance to the wind, are silhouetted against the
sky. Many a drawing of this kind we encounter in the later work of
Millet, which shows how his thoughts harked back in certain moments to
the scenes he had left behind him for ever.

We know that on one or two occasions he returned to Gruchy. Once or
twice he had urgent business which took him back, but sometimes he
went with no other purpose than to renew acquaintance with the scenes
of yore.

Little Jean François was his grandmother's favourite. It was she who
taught him the names of things which surrounded him, and perhaps
directed his thoughts in the channels to which they were finally to be
devoted. Her brother Charles, who formed one of the family, used to
take him for walks, telling him stories on the way. Millet was
devotedly attached to this old man, and when at the age of seven years
he lost him, the gap in his life thus left made an impression upon his
memory never to be effaced.

Five years afterwards he was placed in the hands of the vicar for the
purpose of preparing him for his first communion. The good man seems
to have been taken with the child; he found him so attentive to all
natural phenomenon which was passing around him and intelligent in an
unusual degree. He quickly learnt a considerable amount of Latin,
which introduced him to the great classics. Unfortunately for Millet,
the vicar accepted an offer of transference to a better parish in the
vicinity. The boy had made such progress with his master that it was
decided that he should go with him to his new abode. He was, however,
so missed in his own home, that when he came back for his first
holidays it was decided that he should not return.

He now gave serious attention to the agricultural pursuits of his
father. He threw himself heartily into the work of the farm, and
assisted in the work of sowing and harvesting, of pruning and
thrashing according to the season. His spare time was occupied in
reading with avidity various masterpieces of literature. The authors
he found at hand were such as Fénélon and Bossuet, but he developed a
decided preference, which lasted till the end of his life, for Virgil
and the Bible.

It was at this time that his taste for art began to be developed.

He drew the objects he found around him, and soon acquired sufficient
confidence in his skill to execute a large drawing representing two
shepherds keeping guard over their sheep. These first efforts date
from about his seventeenth year, and foretell the advent of the style
in which he was later to become pre-eminent.


CHAPTER: THE MIGRATION TO PARIS


How frequently has it happened that the first years in the life of a
genius have been employed in labour quite different from that to which
they should have been directed. Such a state of affairs the more often
occurs when the sense of duty has been strong enough to overcome
temporarily the inclination to pursue the natural bent. In the case of
Millet, however, the early years which he devoted to the farm and its
pursuits were by no means wasted. It is on record that he became very
proficient in the various duties in which he was engaged, but at the
same time we can be quite sure that his extraordinary faculties of
observation were constantly being brought into play, and the fruits of
his observations are to be seen in the pictures of his mature period.

A considerable portion of his spare time was taken up with drawing,
not only the persons and objects he found around him, but also
subjects suggested to him by the books he was in the habit of reading.

His family, so far from throwing any obstacles in his way, encouraged
him. In fact it was his father who took him first to Cherbourg in
order to show a painter of that town, named Mouchel, the early
products of his son's genius. The decision at which Millet père had
arrived was prompted by a drawing in charcoal of an old peasant
walking along the road, which had struck him forcibly as being a work
of extraordinary merit. It says much for Mouchel's breadth of mind
that he was equally impressed with the drawings. A man who had been
brought up in the school of David, and who had lived in one of the
most reactionary periods of French art, was hardly to be expected to
take kindly to a style so diametrically opposed to all the traditions
into which he himself had been inculcated; certainly the young
Millet, who had now arrived at the age of eighteen, had not developed
the extraordinary freedom which his works of ten years later
demonstrate. But there was sufficient originality even in his early
drawings to call forth condemnation from a man who had been so
saturated with the teaching of David.

He prevailed upon Millet to leave his son with him, and set him to
work to copy many well-known works of art which he brought before his
pupil by means of engravings. Two months were spent in this way when
news reached Millet that his father had been seized with sudden
illness, and he was obliged in the circumstances to return to
Gréville. He arrived to find the old man unconscious, and very shortly
afterwards he died.

This misfortune awoke in Millet a sense of duty which compelled him to
desert his studies in Cherbourg and superintend the management of the
farm. For some time he devoted himself entirely to his new duties, but
the struggle betwixt duty and genius continued; he gave himself to his
work with all the energy at his disposal, but his thoughts were ever
wandering to his art.

Added to his own inclinations, his grandmother, who perceived his
extraordinary gifts, strongly persuaded him to devote his attention
entirely to art, and consequently after some little time he decided to
return to Cherbourg. Here he entered the studio of M. Langlois, an
artist whose reputation in the town was considerable. Again in this
worthy man he came in contact with a painter who had been brought up
entirely under classical influence. Langlois, who had in his early
days been a pupil of Gros, had absorbed the classical tradition to
such an extent as to be incapable of appreciating any other style. He
appears to have endeavoured to mould Millet in his own method rather
than develop the latent genius which the latter possessed. The
incompatibility of these two men speedily caused the younger to strike
out in his own way. He saw more good in frequenting the museums and
making copies of such works as appealed to him than in listening to
the advice of his teacher. All this occurred, however, without any
breach of friendship occurring. On the contrary, Langlois, after
perceiving the futility of inducing his pupil to follow in his
footsteps, did all he could to advance his interests.

By means of his influence some of Millet's drawings were brought
before the Municipal Council, and Langlois suggested that Millet
should be sent to Paris in order to further his development, and that
the Council should set aside a modest pension to meet his requirements
in that city. The discussion appears to have been very prolonged, and
upon the question being put to a vote it was only carried by means of
the casting vote of the mayor. Four hundred francs was at first
allotted to him in this way, which was further increased shortly
afterwards to six hundred. Such encouragement, meagre though it was,
was sufficient to give him a foothold in the metropolis. He left
Cherbourg in January 1837, on a cold and raw day, the snow falling
heavily throughout the entire journey, and arrived in Paris in a very
disheartened condition. The miserable weather, coupled with the long
journey in which he had had time to think of the small sum which lay
between him and starvation, going to a city which he had never seen
before, had all served to work upon his nerves, and he entered the
great city sick at heart and very despondent.

One of the first visits he made after he was somewhat settled down in
Paris was to the Louvre. Here he was brought into contact for the
first time with many masters, who were to mould his yet plastic
temperament into the form which enabled him to give to the world, in
later years, so many masterpieces. As I have said before, it was
Mantegna who first captivated him, and the influence of the mighty
Paduan was never finally to be shaken off. Michel Angelo awed him with
his sublimity; his classical severity tempered with intense humanism,
his masculine strength, were bound to have their effect upon so
serious a character as Millet. Strange as it may seem to those who are
but superficially acquainted with his art, and are only too apt to
judge him by the influence he has had upon modern French painting, he
was fascinated with the antique. The traditions of Phidias and
Praxiteles, in the form in which they had been transmitted through the
greatest minds of the Renaissance, were ever the factors which guided
him throughout his career. It was this same spirit which impelled his
fervid admiration for Nicolas Poussin, a master who to-day is sadly
underrated and but little understood. It was the mysteries of line,
the wonders of pose and composition rather than the magic of colour
which appealed to him. He had a profound admiration for the glowing
canvases of Titian and Rubens, but he could never overlook entirely
their defects of drawing or, in the case of Rubens, the tendency to
vulgarity. From his remarks in after years it would appear that he was
baffled with the mysticisms of Velazquez and Rembrandt; pure painting
itself could never hold him. He needed to grasp the message which lay
behind it before he felt fully taken into the confidence of the
painter; and as the minds of the Dutchman and the Spaniard ran in
quite different channels to his own, they spoke with a language he
never understood. That he had a perceptive and critically independent
mind may be gauged from his enthusiasm for Delacroix, whose work he
encountered for the first time at the Luxembourg.

During this period of study he was carefully considering under what
master he should place himself. His choice unhappily fell upon
Delaroche. To any one acquainted with the work of the latter master,
a more unsuitable selection could not have been made. Delaroche and
the painters who surrounded him can be appropriately described as
constituting the back-wash of the Empire style, which had reached its
climax with David. His subjects were always treated with academic
reserve. No pyrotechnics were permitted; on the contrary, an
everlasting and mistaken striving for finish was encouraged:
originality was sternly suppressed. To paint human life as it really
was, was too vulgar for any of the painters of this time. They held
the public taste enslaved for years. An innovator such as Millet was
destined to become found his position almost untenable. The band of
critics and painters formed a monopoly which it seemed almost
impossible to break down, and it was only after years of bitter and
determined struggle that the school of nature finally routed its
opponent.

Delaroche doubtlessly found the peasant painter a little rude both in
his person and in his ideas about art. He paid but little attention to
the young man who had placed himself in his hands, and devoted all his
time to students who were more amenable to his influence. A
temperament so sensitive as Millet's was bound to notice this
neglect, and consequently after a time he became so discouraged that
he ceased to frequent Delaroche's studio. Another very good reason for
this action was the lack of resources to continue his payments. Even
during the time he had been with Delaroche he lost no opportunity of
turning a few honest francs by painting the portraits of any who could
be got to sit to him. Delaroche, however, had a more kindly heart than
Millet imagined. He seems to have found out the real distress of the
young artist, and to have assisted him pecuniarily in many ways, and
there is no doubt that he appreciated the talent of the young Norman
much more than he cared to own. Many of his remarks on record would
serve to show that Delaroche already felt that his pupil was destined
to be one of the leaders of the movement which was finally to
overthrow his own style, and doubtlessly felt a great admiration for a
man who had the courage and strength to swim against rather than with
the current.


CHAPTER: SECOND SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


A few months later, when you have just turned into your eighteenth year
and have saved sixty dollars, three twenty-dollar gold pieces, it is
time to return to Chicago. You tell Mr. Newett. He wishes you well and
says that if you care to remain with Iron Ore he will take you into
partnership when you are twenty. This is a big temptation. You admire
and like your boss. He is a grand person--your idol. Saying goodbye
involves a wrench.

You are now back with R-M staying half an hour at night and getting to
work a half hour earlier in the morning and all is well with the world.

At the time of your first visit to Chicago, line photo-engraving was
not even a whisper, and halftones were not even dreams. On your second
visit, pen drawings are beginning to receive direct reproduction.

Folding machines are unknown; and in a large loft, at long tables,
dozens upon dozens of girls are hand-folding railroad timetables.

This loft is on a level with the designing department. Between the
two there is a brick wall through which, about two feet up from the
floor, has been cut an opening in which there is a heavy, tin-covered
sliding door. When you take 14 × 22 metal plates down to the foundry
to be routed--by someone else, for you don’t like machines--you pass
through this loft, between the girl-adorned tables. You, in turn, are
adorned with the side-whiskers known as mutton-chops--trying to look
older than your years. Also, in accord with the custom of the times,
you wear tight-fitting pants. One day, in returning from the foundry
with a metal plate on your shoulder, you pull back the sliding door and
when you lift one leg to step through the opening the pants rip where
the cloth is tightest. On another occasion when again carrying a plate
on your shoulder your jacket pocket catches on a key at the end of a
paper-cutter shaft and the shoddy that had once proved so disastrous in
your pants now probably averts a serious accident.

Web presses and automatic feeders are also absent. In the basement at
Rand McNally’s there is a battery of drum-cylinders printing James S.

Kirk “American Family Soap” wrappers. The stock is thin, red-glazed
paper, and the sheets a double 24 × 36, or perhaps even larger. You
marvel at the skill with which boys do the feeding; but even greater
is your wonder at the hand-jogging and cutting of these slippery and
flimsy sheets.

Invitations are sent out for an inspection of the composing-room of
the Chicago Herald, now newly equipped throughout with Hamilton
labor-saving furniture. You attend. Compositors are sticking type for
the next edition. A little later the Herald places on display its
first web press. This showing is in a ground-floor room, a step or
two down from the street, next door to the Chicago Opera House, where
Kiralphry’s Black Crook is now playing and Eddie Foy is putting
audiences in “stitches.” The press is a single unit standing in a
shallow pit surrounded by a brass rail.

Comes now the winter. It is a Saturday. You are at the home of your
boss. He has invited you to spend the afternoon learning how to paint.

His easel is set up in the basement dining room. He is talking to you
about religion, gravely concerned at learning that you sometimes
attend the Universalist church. He believes you to be a heathen
and suggests that you become converted and join a fundamentalist
church--says that as long as you remain outside the fold and thus are
not a Christian he cannot be interested in helping you become an artist.

The dear man! He wants so much to save your soul. Meanwhile, his good
wife is laying the table for their evening meal. Her smile is motherly.

Maybe she has guessed you were counting the plates. Pleasant odors come
from the kitchen. Our gracious host brings your coat, helps you put it
on, hands you your hat, opens the door and you step out into a Chicago
snowstorm.

At this point the script calls for slow music and heart-rending
sobs--another Kate Claxton in the Two Orphans. Also for melodrama!

This is a beautiful snowstorm. The evening is mild and the flakes are
big. They sail lazily through the amber light of the street lamps,
feather the bare branches of trees that print a fantastic pattern
against the red-brick housefronts. The drifts must be at least an inch
deep. And tomorrow ... tomorrow, you will, as always happens on Sunday,
go to a restaurant on Clark Street where you will be served two pork
tenderloins, flanked by a mound of mashed potatoes topped with gravy,
and one other vegetable, and supplemented by bread and butter and a cup
of coffee--all for twenty cents. Joy bells ringing!

A couple of weeks later you are standing at a case in the printing
plant of Knight & Leonard. Mr. Leonard happens to be passing. He stops
and glances at your galley, type arrangement for a catalog cover.

He is interested and asks where you learned job composition. In one
graphically condensed paragraph, dramatically composed, for it has
been prepared in advance in anticipation of this much wished-for
opportunity, you tell the story of your life--and make a momentous
proposition.

The next morning you are seated at a flat-top desk in the second-floor
office. You have your drawing material and are designing a new booklet
cover for the stationery department of A. C. McClurg. It is understood
that when orders for drawing fail you will fill in by setting type.

Now you are, at nineteen, a full-fledged designer and working at a
window opposite Spalding’s. On playing days you watch Pop Anson and his
be-whiskered team enter a barge and depart for the ball park.

One day a young man appears at K & L’s with proofs of halftone
engravings. He has been with the Mathews Northrup Press in Buffalo,
where he had learned the process. He is now starting an engraving plant
in Chicago. K & L print some specimen sheets on coated paper. These
are probably the first halftones ever engraved in Chicago, also the
first printing of halftones. K & L are Chicago’s leading commercial
printers, quality considered. Mr. Knight is a retired Board of Trade
operator. Mr. Leonard is the practical printer. He is also the father
of Lillian Russell. Once, when she is appearing in Chicago, Miss
Russell visits at the office. You are thrilled.

A man, trained in Germany, grinds ink for K & L. He is located on the
floor above the office. You occasionally visit him. He gives you much
good advice. The Inter Ocean, located on the next corner, installs a
color press. The K & L ink expert helps get out the first edition.

For two years or more you occupy that desk and never again see the
composing room. During this period, while receiving twenty-four dollars
a week, you marry that young lady of your ten-year-old romance.

The J. M. W. Jeffery Co., show printers, is turning out some swell
posters designed by Will Crane. They are printed from wood-blocks
and are wonders. An artist by the name of Frank Getty is designing
labels in the Chicago sales-office of the Crump Label Company. They
are a glorious departure from the conventional truck of the label
lithographers.

Joe Lyendecker is designing covers in color for paper-bound novels.

They are gorgeous. There are no art magazines or other publications
helpful to designers. You, like others, have a scrap-book made up of
booklet covers, cards and other forms of advertising. A designer by
the name of Bridwell is doing some thrilling work for Mathews Northrup
in Buffalo, a concern that is setting a stiff pace for other railroad
printers. Abbey, Parsons, Smedley, Frost and Pennell, and Charles
Graham in Harper’s Weekly, are models for all illustrators.

You are now free-lancing and making designs for Mr. Kasten of the
McClurg stationery department. You have a studio in the new Caxton
building on Dearborn Street. You work all of one day and night and part
of the next day on some drawings for Mr. Kasten. He comes to get them
at four o’clock on the afternoon before Christmas. You tell him you
haven’t eaten since the previous night.

He takes you and your drawings in a cab and stops at a saloon in the
McVickar Theater building and buys you an egg nog. “Drink this,” he
says. “It will put you on your feet until you reach home and can get
dinner.” It is only a glass of milk and egg--and looks harmless. You
get on the Madison Street horse-car, and take a seat up front. There is
straw on the floor to keep your feet warm. You promptly go to sleep.

The car bumps across some tracks and you wake long enough to know your
stop is only two blocks away. In getting off the car the straw tangles
your feet and you seem to be falling over everyone. The sidewalk is not
wide enough for you. This being a new section, the planks are a foot or
more above the ground. You walk in the road.

In these early Nineties no cash is needed to buy a printing outfit,
just an agreement to pay a monthly installment. You buy a Golding
press, a type-stand, a small stone and a few cases of Caslon and an
English text. You are probably itching to play a little with printing.

You do not find time to do more than lay the type. A letter comes from
your wife’s sister in South Dakota. It states that a neighbor’s son or
brother, or some near relative, is in Chicago, that he is interested
in art, and it asks will you look him up. He is a bookkeeper and
cashier in a ground-floor real-estate office at the corner of Clark and
Dearborn. His name is Fred Goudy. He wants to get into the printing
business, in a small way. You tell him of your small outfit and that he
can have it and the benefit of payments made if he will assume future
installments. He agrees.


CHAPTER: EIGHT - THE FEAST OF ST. FRIEND


The consequences of the social self-discipline which I have outlined
will be various. A fairly early result will be the gradual decline, and
ultimately the death, of the superior person in oneself. It is true
that the superior person in oneself has nine lives, and is capable of
rising from the dead after even the most fatal blows. But, at worst,
the superior person--(and who among us does not shelter that sinister
inhabitant in his soul?)--will have a very poor time in the soul of him
who steadily practises the imaginative understanding of other people.

In the first place, the mere exercise of the imagination on others
absolutely scotches egotism as long as it lasts, and leaves it weakened
afterwards. And, in the second and more important place, an improved
comprehension of others (which means an intensified sympathy with them)
must destroy the illusion, so widespread, that one's own case is
unique. The amicable study of one's neighbours on the planet inevitably
shows that the same troubles, the same fortitudes, the same feats of
intelligence, the same successes and failures, are constantly happening
everywhere. One can, indeed, see oneself in nearly everybody else, and,
in particular, one is struck by the fact that the quality in which one
took most pride is simply spread abroad throughout humanity in heaps!

It is only in sympathetically contemplating others that one can get
oneself in a true perspective. Yet probably the majority of human
beings never do contemplate others, save with the abstracted gaze which
proves that the gazer sees nothing but his own dream.

Another result of the discipline is an immensely increased interest in
one's friends. One regards them even with a sort of proprietary
interest, for, by imagination, one has come into sympathetic possession
of them. Further, one has for them that tender feeling which always
follows the conferring of a benefit, especially the secret conferring of
a benefit. It is the benefactor, not the person benefited, who is
grateful. The benefit which one has conferred is, of course, the gift of
oneself. The resulting emotion is independent of any sympathy rendered
by the other; and where the sympathy is felt to be mutual, friendship
acquires a new significance. The exercise of sympathetic imagination
will cause one to look upon even a relative as a friend--a startling
achievement! It will provide a new excitement and diversion in life.

When the month of December dawns, there need be no sensation of weary
apprehension about the difficulty of choosing a present that will suit a
friend. Certainly it will not be necessary, from sheer indifference and
ignorance, to invite the friend to choose his own present. On the
contrary, one will be, in secret, so intimate with the friend's
situation and wants and desires, that sundry rival schemes for
pleasuring him will at once offer themselves. And when he receives the
present finally selected, he will have the conviction, always
delightfully flattering to a donee, that he has been the object of a
are despatched, formal phrases will go forth charged, in the
consciousness of the sender, with a genuine meaning, with the force of a
climax, as though the sender had written thereon, in invisible ink: "I
have had you well in mind during the last twelve months; I think I
understand your difficulties and appreciate your efforts better than I
did, and so it is with a peculiar sympathetic knowledge that I wish you
good luck. I have guessed what particular kind of good luck you require,
and I wish accordingly. My wish is not vague and perfunctory only."

And on the day of festival itself one feels that one really has
something to celebrate. The occasion has a basis, if it had no basis
for one before; and if a basis previously existed, then it is widened
and strengthened. The festival becomes a public culmination to a private
enterprise. One is not reminded by Christmas of goodwill, because the
enterprise of imaginative sympathy has been a daily affair throughout
the year; but Christmas provides an excuse for taking satisfaction in
the success of the enterprise and new enthusiasm to correct its
failures. The symbolism of the situation of Christmas, at the turn of
the year, develops an added impressiveness, and all the Christmas
customs, apt to produce annoyance in the breasts of the unsentimental,
are accepted with indulgence, even with eagerness, because their
symbolism also is shown in a clearer light. Christmas becomes as
personal as a birthday. One eats and drinks to excess, not because it
is the custom to eat and drink to excess, but from sheer effervescent
faith in an idea. And as one sits with one's friends, possessing them in
the privacy of one's heart, permeated by a sense of the value of
sympathetic comprehension in this formidable adventure of existence on a
planet that rushes eternally through the night of space; assured indeed
that companionship and mutual understanding alone make the adventure
agreeable,--one sees in a flash that Christmas, whatever else it may be,
is and must be the Feast of St. Friend, and a day on that account
supreme among the days of the year.

The third and greatest consequence of the systematic cultivation of
goodwill now grows blindingly apparent. To state it earlier in all its
crudity would have been ill-advised; and I purposely refrained from
doing so. It is the augmentation of one's own happiness. The increase of
amity, the diminution of resentment and annoyance, the regular
maintenance of an attitude mildly benevolent towards mankind,--these
things are the surest way to happiness. And it is because they are the
surest way to happiness, that the most enlightened go after them. All
real motives are selfish motives; were it otherwise humanity would be
utterly different from what it is. A man may perform some act which will
benefit another while working some striking injury to himself. But his
reason for doing it is that he prefers the evil of the injury to the
deeper evil of the fundamental dissatisfaction which would torment him
if he did not perform the act. Nobody yet sought the good of another
save as a means to his own good. And it is in accordance with common
sense that this should be so. There is, however, a lower egotism and a
higher. It is the latter which we call unselfishness. And it is the
latter of which Christmas is the celebration. We shall legitimately bear
in mind, therefore, that Christmas, in addition to being the Feast of
St. Friend, is even more profoundly the feast of one's own welfare.


CHAPTER: THE MAN AND HIS ART


Millet is an instance of an artist working out his own destiny,
impelled by irresistible genius, in the teeth of seemingly
insurmountable obstacles. He started life with enormous disadvantages;
without friends in influential circles to spread his fame or plead his
cause; without money to enable him to outlive and triumph over the
ignorant fanaticism of critics and artists, so soaked in the
conventionalised art of their time that they had not perception enough
to appreciate the full meaning of that naturalistic movement, which
was finally to sweep away the quasi-classic art they boasted of with
such bombastic effusion. The path was hard and thorny, and his triumph
was not finally consummated until after his death. He himself found
his only satisfaction in the fact that he had lived his life according
to the dictates of his genius, and had achieved the maximum of which
he was capable.

Millet and our own Cotman were somewhat kindred spirits; there is much
more affinity between the work of the two men than is apparent to any
one who has not closely studied them. The marvellous "Breaking the
Clod," now happily permanently housed at the British Museum, betrays
the same tremendous conception and broad outlook which characterises
many a drawing of Millet's. Both highly strung to a painful extent,
they were each conscious of their inability to curb the power which
prescribed a certain course for them, and in spite of pecuniary
difficulties and unpopularity, an inevitable result of their intense
originality, they pursued a steady course to the end of their lives.

The socialistic doctrines which have been read into the work of Millet
are rather the outcome of the world's uneasy conscience being brought
face to face with a crushing indictment of existing conditions, than
of any design on the artist's part to further the cause of a political
propaganda by means of his art. This somewhat extravagant reading into
his art has certainly been carried to excess. Particularly has such
been the case in America, where a large number of his finest works are
at present to be found, curiously enough in the hands of enormously
wealthy people, who are frequently perhaps the least able to
understand the real meaning of his message.

Coming from a peasant stock, his sympathies were always with the
peasant; it was the only class he understood or cared for. He lived as
one of them, and shared to a large extent in their labour. He has been
designated, not inappropriately, the philosopher in sabots. Rightly or
wrongly he has come to be looked upon as one of the high priests of
communistic doctrines. Few pictures have been so anathematised as the
"Man with the Hoe," and perhaps none have done more to inculcate
sympathy with the degradation of the lower orders of the human race.

The revolting brutality and vacancy of that face haunts the
imagination. Is it possible that fellow-creatures so utterly debased
by toil and neglect exist? Millet dispels any doubt upon the question
by bequeathing to humanity this trenchant portrait. By no means
limited to Barbizon or France, these poor creatures exist in every
country, and curiously enough are considered an essential element in
each country's development.

This poignantly human note is observable in almost every work Millet
wrought; his passionate sympathy with his fellow-man is the keynote of
his art. The wood-cutter in his arduous toil, the shepherd in his
solitariness, the labourer turning the soil with unvarying and
laborious monotony, the mother caring for her children--all carry the
same message for him of that strange and incomprehensible mingling of
joy and sadness we call life. Like many great minds before and since
his time, our artist found the greatest joy in life in a placid and
never changing melancholy. But the peasants he chose knew nothing of
the sadness he saw in them. Completely inured to their toil, and
subdued by it, with no refining or uplifting influence to stimulate
them, they knew nothing, aspired to nothing beyond what they were; it
was left to Millet to supply the "might have been." He saw the inky
blackness of the mind of the "Man with the Hoe," the pathetic
inequality between the mounted farmer directing the safe storage of
his crop, and the stooping figures of the "Gleaners" eager to scrape
up the miserable crumbs which had fallen from the rich man's table. He
traced the lives of these simple folk until we arrive at the grim and
gaunt figure of Death, who, as he grasps the woodman by the shoulder,
reminds him that his course is finished and that he, in common with
all his fellow-men, must enter the great unknown land from which there
is no return. It is a sad and melancholy art, vibrating with purity
and truth, the outpouring of a great soul yearning to express itself
to the utmost of its power. The mind and character of the man can be
read in every line and in every touch of the brush. His drawings and
etchings are even more searching in their virility than his pictures.

There is a spontaneousness about them we search for in vain in his
work in oil and pastel. In black and white his intensely emotional
mind found a swift method of expression; in the laboriousness of oil
painting he was fettered with the complications of the medium. It can
be fairly said that only in one or two paintings--a notable example
can be cited in the wondrous "Sawyers" at South Kensington--does he
rise to the height of a great painter. Millet was a poet, a
philosopher, a great thinker, and the means he chose for expressing
himself were those which were best fitted to his purpose. His
predilections in art were concentrated upon the greatest, and
consequently the men who appealed to him were the thinkers of the
ages. Mantegna and Correggio, Michel Angelo and the mighty Greeks,
these were the masters who left their impress upon his mind and art.

The influence of so sincere and profound an artist has necessarily
been profound. He has moulded men who have achieved world-wide fame;
Segantini, for example, would never have risen to the heights he did
had the example of Millet not been ever before him. There have been
many who, without possessing his genius, have endeavoured to follow
in his footsteps, but successfully as his imitators have sometimes
caught his style, their productions can never live alongside his,
because they lack the real ring of sincerity.