-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: FIVE - DEFENCE OF FEASTING


And now I can hear the superior sceptic disdainfully questioning: "Yes,
but what about the orgy of Christmas? What about all the eating and
drinking?" To which I can only answer that faith causes effervescence,
expansion, joy, and that joy has always, for excellent reasons, been
connected with feasting. The very words 'feast' and 'festival' are
etymologically inseparable. The meal is the most regular and the least
dispensable of daily events; it happens also to be an event which is in
itself almost invariably a source of pleasure, or, at worst, of
satisfaction: and it will continue to have this precious quality so long
as our souls are encased in bodies. What could be more natural,
therefore, than that it should be employed, with due enlargement and
ornamentation, as the kernel of the festival? What more logical than
that the meal should be elevated into a feast?

"But," exclaims the superior sceptic, "this idea involves the idea of
excess!" What if it does? I would not deny it! Assuredly, a feast means
more than enough, and more than enough means excess. It is only because
a feast means excess that it assists in the bringing about of expansion
and joy. Such is human nature, and it is the case of human nature that
we are discussing. Of course, excess usually exacts its toll, within
twenty-four hours, especially from the weak. But the benefit is worth
its price. The body pays no more than the debt which the soul has
incurred. An occasional change of habit is essential to well-being, and
every change of habit results in temporary derangement and
inconvenience.

Do not misunderstand me. Do not push my notion of excess to extremes.

When I defend the excess inevitably incident to a feast, I am not
seeking to prove that a man in celebrating Christmas is entitled to
drink champagne in a public restaurant until he becomes an object of
scorn and disgust to the waiters who have travelled from Switzerland in
order to receive his tips. Much less should I be prepared to justify him
if, in his own home, he sank lower than the hog. Nor would I
sympathetically carry him to bed. There is such a thing as excess in
moderation and dignity. Every wise man has practised this. And he who
has not practised it is a fool, and deserves even a harder name. He
ought indeed to inhabit a planet himself, for all his faith in humanity
But the accompaniments of the feast are also excessive. For example, you
make a tug-of-war with your neighbour at table, and the rope is a
fragile packet of tinselled paper, which breaks with a report like a
pistol. You open your half of the packet, and discover some doggerel
verse which you read aloud, and also a perfectly idiotic coloured cap,
which you put on your head to the end of looking foolish. And this
ceremony is continued until the whole table is surrounded by
preposterous headgear, and doggerel verse is lying by every plate.

But one of the spiritual advantages of feasting is that it expands you
beyond your common sense. One excess induces another, and a finer one.

This acceptance of the ridiculous is good for you. It is particularly
good for an Anglo-Saxon, who is so self-contained and self-controlled
that his soul might stiffen as the unused limb of an Indian fakir
stiffens, were it not for periodical excitements like that of the
Christmas feast. Everybody has experienced the self-conscious reluctance
which precedes the putting on of the cap, and the relief, followed by
further expansion and ecstasy, which ensues after the putting on.

Everybody who has put on a cap is aware that it is a beneficial thing to
put on a cap. Quite apart from the fact that the mysterious and fanciful
race of children are thereby placated and appeased, the soul of the
capped one is purified by this charming excess.

And the Tree! What an excess of the fantastic to pretend that all those
glittering balls, those coloured candles and those variegated parcels
are the blossoms of the absurd tree! How excessively grotesque to tie
all those parcels to the branches, in order to take them off again!

Surely, something less medieval, more ingenious, more modern than this
could be devised--if symbolism is to be indulged in at all! Can you
devise it, O sceptical one, revelling in disillusion? Can you invent a
symbol more natural and graceful than the symbol of the Tree? Perhaps
you would have a shop-counter, and shelves behind it, so as to instill
early into the youthful mind that this is a planet of commerce! Perhaps
you would abolish the doggerel of crackers, and substitute therefor
extracts from the Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin! Perhaps you would
exchange the caps for blazonry embroidered with chemical formula, your
object being the advancement of science! Perhaps you would do away with
the orgiastic eating and drinking, and arrange for a formal conversation
about astronomy and the idea of human fraternity, upon strictly
reasonable rations of shredded wheat! You would thus create an original
festival, and eliminate all fear of a dyspeptic morrow. You would
improve the mind. And you would avoid the ridiculous. But also, in
avoiding the ridiculous, you would tumble into the ridiculous, deeply
and hopelessly! And think how your very original festival would delight
the participators, how they would look forward to it with joy, and back
upon it with pleasurable regret; how their minds would dwell sweetly
upon the conception of shredded wheat, and how their faith would be
encouraged and strengthened by the intellectuality of the formal
conversation!

He who girds at an ancient established festival should reflect upon
sundry obvious truths before he withers up the said festival by the
sirocco of his contempt. These truths are as follows:--First, a
festival, though based upon intelligence, is not an affair of the
intellect, but an affair of the emotions. Second, the human soul can
only be reached through the human body. Third, it is impossible to
replace an ancient festival by a new one. Robespierre, amongst others,
tried to do so, and achieved the absurd. Reformers, heralds of new
faiths, and rejuvenators of old faiths, have always, when they
succeeded, adopted an ancient festival, with all or most of its forms,
and been content to breathe into it a new spirit to replace the old
spirit which had vanished or was vanishing. Anybody who, persuaded that
Christmas is not what it was, feels that a festival must nevertheless be
preserved, will do well to follow this example. To be content with the
old forms and to vitalize them: that is the problem. Solve it, and the
forms will soon begin to adapt themselves to the process of
vitalization. All history is a witness in proof.


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information as to all those great truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to take its place; and all our present joy, as well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examine the extent and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must exclusively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the inspired word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has been made to
show how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it, it is not likely that there
will be much left to embarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solve.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examine (1) the divine element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: Chapter III - MR. DELIGHT’S SURPRISE


“Where is my happy, sunny, good-tempered, busy little daughter Betsey?”
asked Mother playfully, one morning.

“She’s ’way inside of me,” said Betsey, dolefully. “So far I can’t find
her.”

“What drove her in?” inquired Mother, tossing away her duster and
sitting down on the couch.

“I think Mary’s going away to the country drove her in,” replied Betsey,
slowly. “She’s going tomorrow and stay five weeks!”

“Why-e-e!” exclaimed Mother. “If here isn’t a tear! A great, big, round,
wet tear! Whatever shall we do?”

Betsey laughed a little, and wiped her eyes with Mother’s soft
handkerchief. “But you see I won’t have anyone to play with,” she said,
“and I shall be lonesome.”

“What about Mary?” suggested Mother. “Don’t you think she’ll be lonesome
too? Now I think this would be a good plan,—the very first moment you
begin to miss Mary, just begin to make something nice to send her.”

“O I think so, too!” cried Betsey.

“Now I see somebody coming back,” declared Mother. “It’s my happy,
sunny, good-temp—”

But Betsey began kissing Mother so hard that it was impossible for her
to finish.

About a week after this, Mr. Betts sat in his shop making an automobile.

He had made the biggest part out of a candy box, had covered it smoothly
with black oilcloth, and had fastened a fascinating number on the
rear,—the very number that was on Father’s own car. But Mr. Betts was
having rather a hard time with the head-lights. He was almost on the
verge of getting out of patience with the machine, when luckily the mail
came. And there was a little letter from Mary.

  “Dear, darling Betsey (it said),
  I miss you dreadfully. I play every minute with Mr. and Mrs.
  Merrill, and I have made a lovely summer house for them right on the
  bank of the really, truly brook. So they go bathing every day. I
  wish Edith could make Leslie a visit. Wouldn’t it be great?”

Betsey read the letter through twice. When she came the second time to
the sentence, “I wish Edith could make Leslie a visit,” an idea so
exciting and pleasant came to her that she laughed and danced a little
hornpipe around the room.

“I’ll send her! I’ll put her in a box!” she declared to nobody in
particular. “I’ll pack her clothes in a box, and put her in the center
so she won’t break, and then I’ll write what every dress is for!” And
Betsey dashed down-stairs with the letter to consult with Mother.

Mother liked the exciting idea. She even stopped rolling out pink sugar
jumbles to find a large shoe-box for Betsey, and some heavy paper and
cord. And then what fun it was selecting costumes to send with Mrs.
Delight! For this was really going away, not just Make-Believe, although
Make-Believe does very well, when one hasn’t a real friend in the
country.

Betsey first packed Mrs. Delight’s satin and chiffon evening dresses,
her opera cloak, and her outing clothes; her dainty muslins and her
frilly night-dress and her pink kimono. Then she dressed Mrs. Delight
herself in her green Norfolk suit, settled her in the soft bed, and
packed over her white petticoats by the dozen, a woolen blanket for cold
nights, sofa pillows, and hats. Then she wrote a letter to Mary saying
that Mrs. Delight could stay a week, and mailed them together.

Now, to tell the truth, Betsey had been thinking all this time of how
pleased Mary would be, and she hadn’t yet thought how lonesome she would
be, or how extremely lonesome poor little Mr. Delight would be! And
when at last Mr. Betts came back to finish his automobile, it began to
dawn on him how quiet his shop was. He laid down the little wheel and
looked over at poor Mr. Delight lying on the dining-room floor. And then
the dignified carpenter changed suddenly into a very disconsolate little
girl. Just at this minute, Betsey was very sorry she had sent Mrs.
Delight away.

She ran her fingers through her yellow curls and began to think. She
thought how sad and lonesome Father had been the year Mother had taken
Betsey and Tom on the big ship to England, and how the house looked when
they came home again. Not that it was untidy, O no! There was the new
piazza, and the grand new music room, and Betsey’s own room done over in
soft rose-color and white. And another such brilliant idea popped into
Betsey’s head that she laughed aloud.

Mother heard the laugh down in the pantry and smiled, and Norah heard it
in the kitchen and grinned broadly. And Joe, the gardener, heard it out
in the stables, and laughed too.

“I’ll let Mr. Delight get up a surprise! I can make Mrs. Delight her new
bureau with my new mirror, and he can order two new bedrooms and a
bathroom, if the old bookcase is anywhere near the right size!”

Here Betsey jumped up and ran for the old bookcase as fast as she could
go. It was a funny bookcase. Father had “knocked it together” once, in a
great hurry. The two shelves did not reach the back of the bookcase at
all, which left a space for the books to fall backward in the most
bothersome way. But it was lucky for Betsey that Father had left this
space, or there would have been no doors between Mr. Delight’s new
bedrooms. Betsey laid the bookcase on its side and measured it.

“Did you ever!” she cried. It measured exactly the same as the
doll-house.

“So you wish to surprise your wife?” said Mr. Betts, cheerfully rubbing
his hands as if nothing had happened. He set Mr. Delight comfortably in
a little chair on the table.

“I do,” replied Mr. Delight. “We would like to have company, and really
need a guest room.”

“The first thing, then,” proceeded Mr. Betts, “is to select wall-paper
and clap it on.”

“And for clapping it on,” said Betsey, giggling, “I will need paste.”

She skipped down-stairs to see what Mother would think about making
paste on baking day. And she had a feeling besides that the pink sugar
jumbles might be done.

The jumbles were done, but Mother was nowhere to be seen. “A caller,”
said Norah.

Now, if Norah hadn’t been cross, she would have said, “A caller, me
darlint,” and Betsey knew it. She took a delicate bite out of a jumble
and began cautiously, “Good deal of cooking going on, isn’t there,
Norah?”

“A big sight of it,” agreed Norah. “But it’s me that is equal to it.”

“Norah,” said Betsey suddenly, “do you happen to know how paperhangers
make their paste?”

“Flour,” said Norah, “stirred in cold water; then hot water till it’s
just right. It’s many the time I’ve made it for me brother Terence.”

“I’m thinking,” said Betsey thoughtfully, “of papering a new room.”

Norah stopped wiping a milk bottle, put her hands on her hips, and
laughed heartily.

“You’re the cute darlint! Will I be after making ye some paste? Yes,
and I will, if the pies never get made!” And kind Norah sifted the flour
and stirred and stirred, until she could hand Betsey a bright tin pail
full of hot paste as smooth as cream. And when she saw the smile on
Betsey’s face, she was thanked enough.

Mr. Betts walked into his shop with his pail, and put on a long-sleeved
blue apron. He selected a long paintbrush, and a can of white paint.

“While my paste cools,” he said, “I will begin the marble floor in the
bathroom.”

“A marble floor!” exclaimed Mr. Delight. “How extremely rich!”

“Betsey, Betsey! What on earth do I smell?” called Tom.

“You smell Mr. Delight’s marble floor,” replied Betsey.

“Hum,” said Tom, gazing at the tiny room fast growing white. “Which will
you have, right or left?”

“O I love to guess,” cried Betsey. “Right!”

“Better guess right and left,” said Tom, holding out both hands. In
one was a white china mustard-boat, and in the other, a half a hollow
rubber ball. “I found them out in the rubbish box, and it struck me that
the mustard-boat would make a good bathtub,” said Tom.

“And the ball will make a set-bowl!” cried Betsey.

“Good,” said Tom admiringly. “I never should have thought of a set-bowl.

Paint the inside white and set it in a square of cardboard.”

“And I’ll paint the pipe that holds it up with silver,” said Betsey,
“and hang one of my new mirrors over it!”

The next day when Betsey was happily doing all these things, the mail
came. Such a fat letter as Mary sent! One sheet was from Mrs. Delight to
her busy little husband, only she didn’t know he was busy, and thought
he must be nearly dead from lonesomeness. And she said at the end of her
tiny letter: “I am so afraid that you are lonesome, I have almost
decided to come right home.”

Betsey instantly rushed for her doll’s paper and envelopes with Mr.
Delight’s tiny monogram on them, and wrote as fast as she could, in Mr.
Delight’s bold hand-writing,
  “My dearest Edith,
  I am not the least bit lonely, and should feel very badly indeed if
  you were to cut your visit short. So don’t come until the week is
  up.

                                               Your devoted husband,
                                                             William.”

Then she read Mary’s letter. “The dolls are just loads of fun,” Mary
wrote. “I have made them a little sleeping-tent beside ours, and they
sleep out doors with me, and you were such an old dear to send Mrs.
Delight. Hasn’t she the loveliest clothes?”

And just at this moment Betsey was very glad indeed that she had sent
Mrs. Delight away. But the letter reminded her that Mrs. Delight would
be away only three days longer, so she fell to work again.

Such a patient little worker was Betsey! She measured the pretty
wall-paper carefully, and pressed out every bubble of paste with a soft
cloth, so that her walls were very workmanlike indeed. She always stood
Mr. Delight up in his shirt-sleeves in the room she was at work in, to
superintend things in general.

Out of a sweet-smelling box that had once held three cakes of soap,
Betsey made Mrs. Delight’s green ruffled bed. Then she drew chickens
with real ink on the pillow-sham of the guest-room bed, and printed
BATH-MAT in bright red, in the center of the dear little rug, to be laid
beside the new tub.

One morning when Betsey was making up the tiny new beds with the fresh
new sheets and embroidered blankets, Tom came up two stairs at a time
with a large shoe-box. “Mrs. Delight arrived on this train!” he cried.

“O don’t undo her yet!” pleaded Betsey in great distress. “The house
isn’t ready for her to see yet.”

So Tom good-naturedly left the box untouched.

Anxious as Betsey was to see her dearest doll again, she kept steadily
at her delightful work arranging furniture, until everything was in
readiness. Then she stood Dinah up in the dining-room with a tiny
pitcher of lemonade, settled Mr. Delight and Dumpling in the new
touring-car, and whizzed them away to the station.

Then she unpacked the shoe-box. “How surprised she will be,” sang
Betsey, as she burrowed for Mrs. Delight. “Oh, oh! What beautiful new
clothes! And Mary made them!” She held up one shimmering dress after
another,—one trimmed with tiny beads, and one with embroidery. “Now Mr.
Delight can be surprised too!”

And at last she came to the pretty little lady herself. Betsey set her
hat straight and stepped her off the train.

“Woof! Woof!” said Dumpling.

“How glad I am,” cried Betsey in Mr. Delight’s deep bass voice.

“O see the new car!” said Mrs. Delight’s silvery voice. And Betsey
laughed as she lifted the little china dog in beside his mistress.

“How cute they look!” she cried, clapping her hands. Then she whizzed
them as fast as she could to the big green house.

“You can go down at once to your room, my dear,” said Mr. Delight.

“You mean up,” said Mrs. Delight.

“No, he mean down, honey,” said Dinah with a welcoming grin.

So Mrs. Delight went down-stairs in great astonishment to find the
bright, new rooms. She looked first at her beautiful bed, and then at
the bathroom and the guest chamber.

“O William, this is why you didn’t want me to come home. You are the
very kindest man in all the world!”

And the funniest thing! Although Betsey had done every bit of the work,
and Mr. Delight hadn’t done a single thing, she was not the least bit
jealous when she went down-stairs to dinner!


CHAPTER: Chapter IV - THE PICNIC


“What on earth is Betsey doing with that pail?” asked Cousin Margaret
in amazement. She and Mother sat one afternoon in the cool sewing-room
as Betsey passed the door lugging a pail of soapsuds.

“Betsey, what are you up to? Cleaning house?” she called, laughing.

“Just so,” replied Betsey, coming back slowly and setting her steaming
pail on the floor. “You see, Mrs. Delight’s house needs a thorough
cleaning all over before company comes, so today Dinah and Mrs. Delight
clean house.”

“You funny child!” said Cousin Margaret, letting her dainty work fall to
the table. “Do you mean to say you really scrub?”

“Scrub!” echoed Betsey, lifting her pail again. “Say, come on up with me
and see!”

Cousin Margaret was very young and very pretty, and she really didn’t
have the slightest idea how one cleaned a doll-house. So with a little
wink at Mother, she followed Betsey up the stairs.

When she saw Betsey’s collection of house-cleaning materials, she sank
weakly into a big chair and stared. There was a stiff brush, and a soft
brush, and a cake of sapolio; a whole basketful of soft cloths, and a
chamois skin.

“What’s the chamois skin for?” she asked.

“To clean the mirrors,” said Betsey.

“Well, I do declare!” was all Cousin Margaret could say. But pretty soon
she leaned forward and began to watch Betsey with a little secret
admiration. Mrs. Delight was already dressed in one of her fresh morning
dresses, white apron and ruffled sweeping cap, and she and Dinah were
supposed to be moving all the furniture into the drawing-room. Mr.
Delight sat stiffly on the window-seat and watched.

“You see, Cousin Margaret,” explained Betsey, “Mrs. Delight’s twin
sister and her husband are coming to visit. (Those are Anne’s old dolls
she lets me take.) And Mr. Delight is going to the post-office to mail
the invitation. I’ll tell you,—I’ll put him in the car with Dumpling
and make Mrs. Delight and Dinah wave to him, and then you can attend to
him while I clean house. Water’s getting cold!”

“How stylish and proper he do look,—a-driving dat kerridge!” suddenly
observed Betsey in Dinah’s pleasant voice.

“Why, Betsey, how you scared me! I thought you really were another
person!” exclaimed Cousin Margaret, looking up from the post-office. But
when she once looked up from the post-office she couldn’t look back
again, for there was Betsey on her knees, going at the little house with
the largest scrubbing-brush as if the dirt were inches thick.

“You’ll take the paint off!” screamed Cousin Margaret.

“Take the paint off!” echoed Betsey. “Just see here.” She doubled her
cloth over a skewer and began digging out the corners of the little
dining-room windows. And when the room was clean enough, she wiped the
smooth floor vigorously back and forth with a clean cloth.

“Now see the difference,” she announced, looking first at the clean
dining-room and then at the drawing-room.

“Why, the other is actually gray, isn’t it?” said Cousin Margaret,
peering in at the little room. “Don’t you want to let me do this one?”

“O thank you!” cried Betsey, seizing the carpets to shake out of the
window. So Cousin Margaret promptly began her first house-cleaning. As
she polished off the threshold, she heard a gentle thud, thud, over by
the desk, so she took her head out of the house to see what was going
on. There sat Betsey beating pillows with two of the tiniest little
carpet-beaters you ever saw. They were made of twisted wires, exactly
like big ones, only so small that they made you laugh to look at them.

Cousin Margaret laughed. But she had to own up that the rooms looked
very fresh and sweet, as they put back the clean carpets and dusted
furniture.

“What does your Mrs. Delight do to entertain her guests?” she asked.

“I thought they could have a picnic,” said Betsey, pausing a moment to
think. “I have a pattern for a dandy lunch-basket. And Tom has the
dearest little canoe!”

“Has he, indeed?” observed Tom’s voice around the corner.

“You’ll lend it, won’t you?” pleaded Betsey.

“It makes a good deal of difference what it’s wanted for,” replied Tom,
with his hands in his pockets.

“Well, the Delights are going to have a picnic, and they go to a certain
grove, like Brighton’s Lake, you know, where they have canoes to rent.

And I have everything but the canoe, Tom.”

“Everything?” questioned Tom. “Have you a Thermos bottle?”

“Hum!” said Cousin Margaret loudly. “I’ll make the Thermos bottles for
you,—one quart size, and one pint. I’d love to!”

“How are you going to make them, Cousin Margaret?” asked Tom
respectfully.

“If you children will come down street with me, and show me the nearest
gum machine,—the kind where the gum is done up in silver paper, you
know,—I’ll let you watch me!” bargained Cousin Margaret, determined now
to make a perfectly wonderful article.

“What does she want gum for?” giggled Betsey, scurrying down-stairs
behind Tom.

“She wants the silver paper,” said Tom wisely.

And that was exactly what she did want at the time, but when the happy
trio stood before the red machine in the grocery store, and the thin
stick of gum came shooting out into Cousin Margaret’s hands, she had
another idea.

“Come, we’ll buy three sticks, and I’ll hire you to chew one apiece,”
she said. “Peel off the silver paper without tearing it.”

“I don’t like gum after the wintergreen flavor goes,” said Betsey,
chewing hard.

“You can’t have it anyway,” said Cousin Margaret severely. “Didn’t I buy
it for my quart bottle?”

“You’re going to mold it!” cried Betsey, skipping along the sidewalk.

“Aren’t you clever!”

Mother smiled when she saw them go upstairs again, and she went quietly
out to the pantry without saying a word.

Cousin Margaret sat down at Mr. Betts’ work-table with a mighty puff.

She smoothed away on the bright tin-foil until it shone like solid
silver. Then she molded her soft chewing-gum carefully into a tiny pint
bottle. She clipped off a long strip of tin-foil and wound it around the
bottle, pinched the top a little, and glued on a paper label.

“Keeps cold twenty-four hours!” she cried, holding it out for
inspection.

“Good!” shouted Tom and Betsey.

“Hand over your gum, children,” said Cousin Margaret. “It takes two for
a quart. You can be making the lunch-basket.”

“Weren’t you going to play tennis this afternoon?” asked Betsey
thoughtfully. “Mother said I mustn’t bother you.”

“I was, but I’m not,” replied Cousin Margaret recklessly. “I’d rather
play picnic, and sail your canoe in the bathtub.”

Tom slipped quietly down-stairs at mention of the bathtub, and neither
the little girl nor the big girl noticed.

“O William, here come Prudence and John!” cried Cousin Margaret in Mrs.
Delight’s silvery voice, rushing Mrs. Delight to the front door.

“Here we are!” shouted Betsey for Mr. Darling. “It’s so much fun to have
somebody else manage all these dolls, Cousin Margaret!”

“Suppose you manage the Delights,” suggested Cousin Margaret in an
undertone, “and let me have the company.”

“I’d rather,” said Betsey, joyfully, taking charge at once of Mr.
Delight, who was not helping his guests properly.

“Keep your dog off!” said Cousin Margaret, making Mr. Darling rush at
Dumpling in the most ridiculous manner.

“Are you tired, Prudence?” asked Mrs. Delight.

“Tired? No!” said Mrs. Darling.

Betsey made Mr. and Mrs. Delight look at each other.

“Why, what’s up?” questioned Mr. Darling, sitting down on the tiny piano
stool.

“We thought,” began Betsey in Mrs. Delight’s most charming manner, “that
we might go on a picnic.”

“Hoo-ray!” cried Cousin Margaret, making Mr. Darling turn a splendid
handspring across the little parlor.

“Why, John, I am ashamed of you,” said Betsey, sternly, for his wife,
and trying in vain to stop laughing.

“I brought my camera that has legs,” said Mr. Darling, “and I’ll take
your pictures.”

“We haven’t really a camera with legs, have we?” whispered Betsey.

“Down in my trunk,” said Cousin Margaret. “You begin to dress them in
picnic clothes, and I’ll get it. I meant to save it until I went home,
but I know you’d rather have it now.” She struggled to her feet, and
left Betsey tying a soft blue ribbon around Mrs. Delight’s fluffy head.

The camera proved to be a fascinating tin one, with a front part that
pulled in and out beautifully.

“Let’s hurry. I’m hungry already!” said Cousin Margaret, piling
everything into the little touring-car,—basket, dog, Dinah, and shawls,
helter-skelter. The car whizzed around the room a few times, and stopped
with a jolt at the picnic grounds.

“Spread the shawl on the ground about here,” directed Mrs. Delight,
pointing with the tip of her slipper to a little clearing. “Strew the
cushions around, and—”

“Open up the lunch!” interrupted Mr. Darling, setting up his camera. “I
don’t want to take my picture until the eating begins, and the sun is
about right now.”

“His old picture is just an excuse to eat”, remarked Mrs. Darling.

“Better give de ole dog sump’in to eat. Den he won’t be boddering so
much,” said Dinah.

“Well, let me see,—he’s had twelve cookies,” reflected Mrs. Delight.

“Give him three more and let him go over on that little hill to eat
them.”

“Can’t he hab apple dumpling?” asked Dinah anxiously.

“Give Dumpling Delight a delightful dumpling,” sang Mr. Darling. “Now,
all ready! Take up a sandwich, Mrs. D., and look pleasant!”

“Now let’s take them down to the lake,” suggested Betsey, poking the
last crumb under Dumpling’s muzzle.

When they reached the big, white-tiled bathroom, they found the bathtub
filled with water, a wharf across it, and a beautiful, dark green
sailboat floating gracefully up and down with the waves. And the waves
were so very lively that it seemed as if someone must be quite near.

Betsey glanced behind the door.

“O here’s the Mr. Wind that made the waves,” she said gaily, pulling Tom
down to the lake.

“Will somebody kindly notice the boat-house?” said Tom, kneeling down
good-naturedly.

There was a plank across the tub, wide enough to drive the little
motorcar along, and at the further end stood a tiny cardboard
ticket-window. Behind the little bars, made of toothpicks, stood a paper
ticket-man in a blue cap. And overhead was printed:
                          “CANOES $1.00 AN HOUR
SAILBOATS $5.00 AN HOUR”

“Isn’t that grand?” cried Cousin Margaret. “We can afford the green
sailboat as long as the Delights are millionaires.”

Tom grinned, and watched the big girl and the little girl seat the happy
dolls safely in the big boat. And when it was finally untied and sailed
slowly off down the lake, it looked exactly like a real boat party of
sober grown-up people.

“It actually made me sort of hungry,” said Cousin Margaret at last, “to
see them eat at the picnic. Let’s go down and get a gingersnap.”

Tom grinned again. “Mother said when you were through playing, to come
to her upstairs piazza.”

With one accord the two girls carefully placed the picnic party safely
on the wharf and skipped for the piazza. There sat Mother, in her
prettiest company dress of soft white crêpe, smiling at nobody in
particular, but looking at the green wicker tea-table.

“Wow!” cried Tom. “If Dumpling were here, he’d say ‘Woof!’”

On the tea-table were pink plates of thin sandwiches, and a huge glass
pitcher of strawberry-ade with real strawberries floating in it.

“I wish you would pour, Margaret,” said Mother, smiling.

So Cousin Margaret, with a sly wink at Betsey, took her place very
sedately and poured the frosty glasses full, and passed the sandwiches.

And she did it so very well, and with such a grown-up air, that Betsey
wondered how in the world Cousin Margaret could be a little girl so
easily.


CHAPTER: Second Day - Oh, what a Fall!


There was a little more stir in the place the next morning, but it was
because it was filled with tramps, who were wisely taking advantage of the
early coolness and hurrying on their way. But when we turned off the High
Street the town was as still in the glare of day as it had been in the
late twilight. The high brick walls of the private gardens might have
enclosed dwelling-places of the dead rather than of the living, for not a
sound came over them. The little pointed houses might have been sepulchres
for all the signs of life they gave. The whole town, instead of one little
street, should be called Tranquil Place. It seemed very characteristic
that the Cathedral should be closed, and this at the season when the
tourist is abroad in the land. It was being cleaned, an old man told us.

We looked through the iron railing of the door into the nave, and at the
marble floor, and the tall, white, rounded arches. 'It's like looking down
the throat of Old Time!' Mr. Grewgious thought when he stood there. At
the farther end by the chancel steps a charwoman was at work on bended
knees. By her side was one small bucket. Here, truly, was a Liliputian set
to do the work of Brobdignag. At that rate it is probable visitors were
shut out for many months.

After we had looked at the 'Bull,' which still reminds the public by a
sign of the good beds enjoyed by Mr. Pickwick and his friends, at the Town
Hall where Pip was apprenticed, at the many-gabled, lattice-windowed house
in which Rosa Bud bloomed into young ladyhood, and were standing in front
of the 'Six Poor Travellers'' lodging-place, reading the inscription over
the door, and wondering who were the proctors classed with rogues who
could not rest within, a benevolent Englishman passing that way fell upon
us. He was a worthy fellow-citizen of Richard Watts. Seeing we were
strangers, he, without waiting to be asked, bestowed upon us the charity
of information.

'Do you know what a Proctor is, Sir?' he asked, addressing himself to J.,
who meekly, as befits one receiving alms, said that he did not. 'No! Well,
then, I will tell you. It is a proc-u-ra-tor,--one who collects Peter's
pence for the Pope, Sir. Richard Watts lived in the sixteenth century,
when Protestantism made people feel bitterly, Sir, and he would have no
friends of the Pope beneath his roof. Proc-u-ra-tor! That's what a Proctor
is, Sir.'

He had disappeared around the curve of the street before we had finished
thanking him. As the information was new to us, I, with the common belief
that others must be as ignorant as myself, now imitate his benevolence,
and here bestow it in alms upon whoever may be in need of it.

It was one o'clock when we mounted our tricycle and set out once more for
Canterbury. The sky was still unclouded and the day warm, but a good
breeze was blowing, and we were fresh for our ride. The streets of Chatham
were as busy as those of Rochester were idle, and blocked with waggons, so
that we had to fall in line and go at snail's pace. Once, with a sudden
halt, we were brought so near a horse just in front, that my foot knocked
against his leg; but he bore the blow stoically, as if he were used to
Chatham streets. An American circus was about to start out on its grand
street parade, and children hung about corners and out of windows. At the
foot of the hill outside the town, and marked 'Dangerous' by the National
Cyclists' Union, for the benefit of cyclers, two very small boys offered
to 'Push it up, Sir!' but as it looked as if it would push them down, we
declined. At the top we met a cycler on his way from Canterbury, and he
gave us evil tidings of the road. It became worse with every mile, he
said, and it was heavy and hilly, and the dust was enough to stifle one.

To this last statement his appearance bore good testimony.

But at first we found it fair enough. From Chatham to Sittingbourne our
journey was one of unmixed pleasure. The wheels went easily, and the wind
blew on our backs. Now we passed on our right a vast treeless expanse,
divided into squares of green, and golden, and brown, all shining softly
in the sunlight, with here and there a windmill; but to the left we could
see far below us the white line of the river winding between the flat
grey marshes, where in Pip's day the escaped convicts prowled. Again we
wheeled through small, sleepy villages, with church and tower half hidden
in clumps of trees, and with red oasts, whose crooked cowls loomed up over
the chimney-pots of the low cottages: for we had come to the hop country,
and at every step the land of Kent grew fairer. Beyond Rainham the road
lay between hop-gardens, as they are appropriately called, and
cherry-orchards. In places the vines formed tall, shady hedges; in others
the gardens were shut in by bare poles hung with coarse brown cloth, to
defy the wind and the depredations of small boys, and other destructive
animals: but the prettiest fields were those which were in no way hedged
about, so that we could look down the long, narrow, green aisles, which
seemed to lead to fields of light beyond. The vines twisted lovingly up
the poles, which in many places bent beneath masses of green fruit, or
else the topmost shoots crossed and intertwined from one pole to another,
and the whole field was woven into a large arbour. Where the sunlight fell
upon the green clusters it turned them to pure gold, and the leaves,
blowing gently to and fro, seemed to rejoice in their great beauty. The
cherry-orchards were so pretty and trim that I wondered if, like the
hop-fields, they were not sometimes called gardens. The trees had been
long stripped of their fruit, but their branches were well covered with
cool green leaves, and their shadows met on the grass beneath. There was
one in particular, before which we rested. Sheep were browsing placidly on
the downy turf, and when we looked low down between the trees we could see
the shining white river far in the distance. I half expected to hear a
new Daphnis and Menalcas singing their pastorals in gentle rivalry.

We met few people. The tramps who come down to Kent for the hop-picking
turn off from Rochester to go to Maidstone, where the largest hop-fields
are, and where there is more chance for them to be hired; but a
comparatively small number go on to Canterbury. Some cyclers were making
the most of the fine day. As we sat idly between the hop-gardens three
passed us. Two rode a tandem; the third, a bicycle; but they were of the
time-making species, for whom the only beauty of a ride is that of speed.

Looking at them, and then at the sheep in a field beyond, I thought the
latter were having the best of it. A little further on we met a party of
three Frenchmen. One rode ahead on a bicycle, the two others followed on a
tandem like ours. One of the latter, when he saw us, called out to the
bicycler, 'C'est bon d'aller comme ça!' I suppose he thought we should
not understand him, and if we did--well, ought not a Frenchman always to
be gallant?

We rode on with light hearts. An eternity of wheeling through such perfect
country and in such soft sunshine would, we thought, be the true earthly
paradise. We were at peace with ourselves and with all mankind, and J.
even went so far as to tell me I had never ridden so well!

It was, then, in a happy frame of mind, that we reached the inn at
Sittingbourne. It was an unassuming place, but quiet and clean; the bar
was on one side of the hall, the coffee-room on the other. The latter was
empty, and the landlady, after laying the cloth for our bread and cheese
and shandy-gaff--of all drinks the most refreshing to the cycler--left us
alone to study this printed notice, which hung in a frame over the door:--
  'Call frequently,
  Drink moderately,
  Pay honourably,
  Be good company,
  Part friendly,
  Go home quietly.'

We soon had the opportunity of putting into practice one clause of this
advice, for the door was suddenly burst open, and a short man with a bald
head, who wore the Cyclists' Touring Club uniform, rushed in.

'Are you the lady and gentleman that came on the tandem?' he asked, before
he was quite in the room.

We said we were.

'I don't like tandems, do you?' he continued, fiercely, as if he were
daring us to differ from him. He seemed to think we had come there that he
might tell us his grievances; which he did, with much elaboration, while
we ate our lunch. He and his wife had been down to Margate from London,
and were now on their way back, he said. They had made the trip on a
tandem; it was the first time he had ridden one, and it would be the last,
for he didn't like tandems--they were horrid things! Did we like tandems?

To avoid repetition, I may here mention that this expression of dislike,
together with the query as to our opinion, was the refrain to everything
he said. It was always given with the same interest and emphasis as if it
were an entirely original remark. The only variation he made was by
sometimes beginning with the statement, and at others with the question.

He explained the reasons for his dislike. The principal was, that the
people one met on the roads always insulted riders on a tandem. Why, he
had been off his machine a dozen times that morning, fighting men who had
been chaffing him! I thought, with a shudder, of the crowd of hucksters
J. would have had to fight by London Bridge, had he been of the same mind.

Then, the next objection was, that he had to sit behind his wife--she had
to steer, and he would not be surprised if he were seriously injured, or
even killed, before he got back to London. Women were heedless things, and
easily frightened. His wife, who had joined us a few minutes before, here
grew angry, and a slight skirmish of words followed between them: she
reminded him of the dangers they had escaped through her nerve and
skill; he recalled the dangers into which they had run owing to her
thoughtlessness and timidity. But, just at this point of the discussion J.
took out his watch. At sight of it the little man forgot his anger to
pounce upon it, with never as much as 'An it please you!' Then, looking up
in triumph, he exclaimed, 'I knew it! it's an American watch! They know
how to make watches over there, but they're ruining our trade.' Then he
explained that he was a London watchmaker, and he pulled out of his pocket
a large substantial specimen of his workmanship.

The talk now turning upon America, we told him, in answer to his
inquiries, that we were Americans.

'From Canada?' his wife asked.

'Oh, no!' I answered; 'from Philadelphia.'

'Dear me!' the watchmaker said; 'then you're real Americans! But you
speak English very well!'

'Yes,' J. admitted, modestly. 'But then, you know, English is sometimes
spoken in our part of the world!'

All this made the fierce little cycler very friendly, and he next wanted
to know where we were going.

'To Canterbury,' we said.

'To Canterbury!' he cried; and then, to give greater force to his words,
he came and stood directly in front of us on the other side of the table.

'To Canterbury! Well, then, my advice to you is, if you have no other
object than pleasure, don't go! No, don't you go! I've been there, and I
know what I say. It's a rotten place. There's nothing in it but an old
cathedral and a lot of old houses and churches, and they charged me
sixpence for keeping my tandem one night. I don't like tandems-horrid
things! Do you like tandems? Yes, it's a rotten place, and if I had my way
I'd raze it to the ground!'

I now understand why it is that Mr. Matthew Arnold thinks the average
Briton so very terrible.

By this time we had finished our lunch, and were ready to start. The
watchmaker and his wife had engaged in another battle. She did not agree
with him in his opinion of Canterbury. Indeed I believe they did not
agree upon any one subject, and the tandem had tried their tempers. They
had both said they wanted to see us off, and to compare machines; but we,
being modest people, thought we would as lieve escape without their
comments and farewells. This seemed a favourable opportunity. In the heat
of the argument we left the room and paid our bill, without their noticing
our retreat; but just as we had mounted our tricycle, and were wheeling
softly away, we heard a voice calling, 'Oh, I say now! do come back a
minute: I want to show you my machine!' It would have been more than
uncivil to have refused, so we sat patiently while the much-abused tandem
was brought out. The owner, in his pride, rode out on it, pedalled by us,
and then wheeled round and faced us with an abruptness that fairly took
away our breath. It was the shortest turn I have ever seen, and I waited
for the end with the same uncertainty with which one watches a trapeze
performance. Then there was some little talk about bells and brakes, and
tyres and saddles. In the meantime the landlady, with two or three of her
friends, had come out, and was staring at us with a curiosity for which I
could not account. But presently she said, 'Are you going back soon?' And
then I knew she had heard we were Americans, and had come to have a look
at these strange people who had sailed across the sea, apparently for no
other reason than to test the cycling properties of the roads of Kent.

After this exhibition was over we said good-bye very pleasantly, and rode
off, followed by their wishes for our good luck, while the watchmaker
called out encouragingly, 'You Americans ride pretty well; but I don't
like tandems. Horrid things! Do you like tandems?'

But their wishes were the only good luck we met with. We had not gone far
from Sittingbourne, when we admitted that the pilgrim we had met just
outside of Chatham was no false prophet after all; for the road now began
to be heavy with sand and rough with flints. And oh, the hills! They were
not very steep, but I was a novice in cycling. No sooner were we on
up-grades than I exhausted myself by my vigorous back-pedalling. I have
heard the uninitiated say that tricycling must be so easy, just like
working the velocipedes of our childhood. But let them try! The country
had lost none of its beauty. Fields were as green and golden, orchards as
shady, and sheep as peaceful, as those we had seen before lunch. There
were little churches on hilltops and pretty dingles by the wayside;
handsome country-houses with well-kept lawns, and fields where cricketers
were playing, and young girls in gay-coloured dresses were applauding;
and there were old-fashioned farm-houses and quaint inn-yards. We passed
through villages by which little quiet rivers ran, some with boats lying
by the shore, and others, as at Ospringe, where horses and waggons were
calmly driven through the water. But the heaviness had spread from the
road to my heart, and all joyousness had gone from me.

The worst of it was, that as the road here wound little, we could see it
miles ahead--a white perpendicular line on the purple hill which bounded
the horizon. We knew this must be Boughton Hill, the fame of whose
steepness has gone abroad in the cycling world. With the knowledge of what
was to come ever before me, I began to pedal so badly that J. told me so
very plainly, and said, moreover, that I was more of a hindrance than a
help to him. For some time we rode on very silently. Earlier in the
afternoon we had been passed by a man driving an empty carriage, of whom
we had asked one or two questions. He had stopped to watch the
cricket-match, but he now overtook us, and, to add to my misery, asked me
if I would not like him to drive me into Canterbury. All this was hard to
bear.

Finally, we came to Boughton, a small village with ivy-grown houses and a
squirrel and a dolphin staring at each other amicably from rival inns. It
is right at the foot of Boughton Hill. Now that we were near it, the white
line we had seen for so long widened into a broad road, but it looked no
less perpendicular. It was here that Chaucer's pilgrims
                      'gan atake
  A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
  And undernethe he wered a white surplis.'

There is no record that mine host and the Chanones Yeman dismounted and
walked to rest their horses. But all the many waggons and carriages and
cycles we saw above us on the modern road were being led, not driven.

Halfway up was an old lumbering stage, with boxes piled on the top, and
big baskets and bundles swinging underneath. The driver was walking; but a
tramp, who had made believe to push when on level ground, now sat
comfortably on the backseat, taking his ease. A little lower was the
friendly driver with his empty carriage, for he had rested at the
'Squirrel,' and so we had caught up to him again. At the top we looked
back to see that the West was a broad sea of shining light. A yellow mist
hung over the plain, softening and blending its many colours. Far off to
the north the river glittered and sparkled, and a warm glow spread over
the green of the near hillsides. The way in front of us was grey and
colourless by comparison. It was almost all down-hill after this. Did I
want to be driven into Canterbury, indeed? My benevolent friend might now
have asked us to pull him in. The stage made a show of racing us, but we
gave it only a minute's chance. An officer in braided coat driving a drag
passed us triumphantly while we were on our up-grade; but when we came
again to a level we left him far behind.

  'Wete ye not wher stondeth a litel toun,
  Which that ycleped is Bob up-and-doun,
  Under the blee in Canterbury way?'

It is better known now as Harbledown. A little of our trouble here came
back, for the road leading to that part of it 'ycleped Bob-up,' was steep
and heavy, and we had to walk. To our right were the old red-brick
almshouses and the little church of St. Michael, one of the many oldest
churches in Kent, and of which all we could see was the ivy-covered tower.

It was here that Henry, when on his way to the holy shrine, dismounted,
that, as became his humble calling of pilgrim, he might walk into
Canterbury. And it was here, too, that the Person began his long-winded
discourse. But we, less reverent than King Henry, now mounted again; and,
less phlegmatic than the Person, we held our peace. For as we rode further
up we heard far-away chimes, just as Erasmus did when he went from
Harbledown; and there gradually rose before us a tall, grey tower, then
two more, and at last, as we reached the top of the hill, we saw in the
plain below the great Cathedral itself, standing up far above the low red
roofs of Canterbury. We were almost at our goal.

A little further on we passed a hop-field, where the picking had already
begun. In one part the poles were stripped of their vines, so that it
looked as if the farmer had reaped for his sowing a crop of dead
sticks. In the other the poles were still green, but the day's work was
just over. Women were packing up kettles and pans, jugs and bottles, and
stowing babies and bundles into perambulators, while two or three men were
going the rounds with bag and basket, measuring the day's picking, and
marking off the account of each picker by notching short, flat pieces of
wood held up for the purpose. In the road beyond a large cart, packed with
well-filled bags, was being drawn homewards by three horses, while a young
man rode up and down the green aisles. 'I beg your pardon, Sir,' a farm
hand said to J., who had been sketching, 'but you've been takin' some of
our people, and now you hought to take our Guvnor on his 'oss;' and he
pointed to the young man. All the way into the town we passed groups of
pickers: women with large families of children, small boys with jugs and
coats hung over their shoulders, and young girls with garlands of hops
twisted about their hats, and all were as merry as if they had been on a
picnic. We saw them still before us, even after we had turned into Saint
Dunstan's Street, from which the gold of the afterglow was fast fading,
and were riding between the quaint, gabled houses, through whose
diamond-paned windows lights were beginning to appear. Before us was the
old, grey-towered city gate, through which royal and ecclesiastical
processions and knights and nobles once passed, but where we now saw only
the tramps who had arrived at the eleventh hour sitting at its foot with
their bags and baggage.

We 'toke' our inn at the sign of the 'Falstaff,' without the gate. Honest
Jack, in buff doublet and red hose, hanging between the projecting windows
and far out over the pavement by a wonderful piece of wrought-iron work,
gave us welcome, and within we found rest and good cheer for weary
pilgrims. Then we 'ordeyned' our dinner wisely, but it was too late to go
to the Cathedral that same evening, as we should have liked to have done,
and we were forced to wait for the morrow. After we had come downstairs
from our dimity-curtained bed-chamber, had dined, and were sitting over
our tea in a little, low-ceilinged room, from whose window we looked into
a pretty garden of roses and grapevines, a stranger sent us greeting, and
asked if he might come and sit with us. He was a priest, also making
pilgrimage, who had ridden from Rochester on a machine like ours; so that
we became friendly forthwith, and, like the pilgrims who rested at the
'Chequers of the Hope,' every man of our party
          'in his wyse made hertly chere,
  Telling his felowe of sportys and of chere,
  And of other mirthis that fellen by the way,
  As custom is of pilgrims and hath been many a day.'

And just before we parted for the night we held counsel together and
agreed that, in the morning, we would in company visit the holy shrine.