-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, one wonders
from whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great cities such as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simple ideas have departed from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lends an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence, for life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothed, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is brought before us in the
rugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softening
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelus for depicting them, Millet has brought
before us in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, but also the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoling influence of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sentimental, except by those
who have not freely grasped the immense import of these qualities in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy of technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a determination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this supreme quality will assuredly come into his own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering the oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line can never be appreciated
if one is not acquainted with the country he painted. No two countries
are alike in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an artist to the full, to have studied the country
he has chosen to depict. The outlines of the landscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differ
materially in various districts, and consequently it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be said that as a painter, purely and simply, Millet
will never occupy a very high position in the world of art. He never
bursts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the painters of our own days. His
manner of handling the brush is always restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyers," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts were directed to suppressing any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might divert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequently appears to achieve his ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
throws off his sadly philosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example, in the well-known picture of "La Baigneuse," he
endeavours to draw himself into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disporting themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, the shimmering of the trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through the
branches. But in the hands of Millet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable something lacking which attracts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being more a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in his great paintings, which by the way are not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we discover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and understood the great problems of life.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances would have brought him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself and his little ménage in the neighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty which would
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been made the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been impressed with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrived for him to call together his flock and place them in safe
quarters for the night. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allowing the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. There is no other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of the landscape
around him, and sees nothing more in a field than how much corn can be
raised each year from it, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. He feels nothing of the glorious beauties of
the sunset, of which he is so often a witness; how it softens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nothing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, how the clouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the whole heavens are lighted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us understand that in spite of this, the
shepherd is performing a duty to humanity not to be underrated. The
sheep he has so carefully and conscientiously reared will form food
to-morrow for many a hungry town-dweller. Further, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closes the pen for the night and traces his
tired steps towards his simple home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by his wife, who like himself has
had her share of duties to occupy her during the day, is partaken of
surrounded by a hungry and joyous group of children. Such themes
suggested by the simplicity of his own life appealed to him with
irresistible force, and it is in their portrayal that his greatness is
manifested.

Perhaps no season of the year presented the same attraction for Millet
as the spring. The period when all the earth after its long winter
sleep is about to waken into new life seems to have always been a
source of inspiration to him. In "The Sower" he emphasises the fact
that the fruits of the harvest are not to be had without due labour
being expended upon the earth. The sloping field, barren of
vegetation, and crowned at the top with a small clump of trees, is
being broken up by the distant plough drawn by two horses and guided
by a peasant. The latter figure is one of the noblest of Millet's
creations. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
continuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony of his toil. He crosses the field in one direction, only to
return at an interval of a few feet. In the foreground we have the
sower, a middle-aged man of typical peasant type, on whose left side a
bag of seeds is slung. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrows open to receive it. So long as
he continues in the same track his labour will be well performed, and
hence his task is just as monotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up in the field. The silhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolical of the labour to be expended in life before
results are forthcoming.

From these remarks it will be seen that in considering the works of
Millet, one must not judge him from the standpoint of a mere painter.

His brush is only the means to an end, and by its means he is enabled
to bring the fruits of his philosophic observation before us in
permanent form. It has been charged against the "Angelus" that it was
not a remarkably fine piece of painting, that many a young artist of
the present generation is infinitely better equipped, technically
speaking, than the master who wrought this celebrated canvas. This may
in a measure be true, but it must never be forgotten that Millet
brought into play exactly the means which could illustrate his meaning
in the clearest terms. He had not intended, in painting such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonish his fellow artists
with its brilliancy of handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to make the beholder forget the painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs right through the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we are obliged to weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with good large eyes and an open expression of face; but
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him by the prepared way
he offered, and by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-bred,
perfectly unmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr. Slinkton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Sampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I really did not feel justified in troubling Mr.
Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I should have been glad to show him any attention on our friend’s
introduction.

‘I am sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one that the
friends will never follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don’t you, in your business, find them so every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth, white
parting on me with its ‘Straight up here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presently, for our friend had a new
cook, and dinner was not so punctual as usual, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in talent and vigour.’

Not at once following out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss of that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Understand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was at once the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
trim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in his former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapable of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blank.

‘Most likely a false one.  You know what Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shaving
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had relinquished all his avocations and all his
prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems probable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
it very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as we were parted,
like the other knots of talkers, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved on behalf of a man
whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I have lost one of
two charming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—barely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the coldness of
my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
my bad experiences; they were not natural to me; and I often thought how
much I had lost in life, losing trustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gaining hard caution.  This state of mind being habitual to me, I
troubled myself more about this conversation than I might have troubled
myself about a greater matter.  I listened to his talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other men responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in talking with me, he had easily started the subject I
might be supposed to understand best, and to be the most interested in,
so, in talking with others, he guided himself by the same rule.  The
company was of a varied character; but he was not at fault, that I could
discover, with any member of it.  He knew just as much of each man’s
pursuit as made him agreeable to that man in reference to it, and just as
little as made it natural in him to seek modestly for information when
the theme was broached.

As he talked and talked—but really not too much, for the rest of us
seemed to force it upon him—I became quite angry with myself.  I took his
face to pieces in my mind, like a watch, and examined it in detail.  I
could not say much against any of his features separately; I could say
even less against them when they were put together.  ‘Then is it not
monstrous,’ I asked myself, ‘that because a man happens to part his hair
straight up the middle of his head, I should permit myself to suspect,
and even to detest him?’

(I may stop to remark that this was no proof of my sense.  An observer of
men who finds himself steadily repelled by some apparently trifling thing
in a stranger is right to give it great weight.  It may be the clue to
the whole mystery.  A hair or two will show where a lion is hidden.  A
very little key will open a very heavy door.)

I took my part in the conversation with him after a time, and we got on
remarkably well.  In the drawing-room I asked the host how long he had
known Mr. Slinkton.  He answered, not many months; he had met him at the
house of a celebrated painter then present, who had known him well when
he was travelling with his nieces in Italy for their health.  His plans
in life being broken by the death of one of them, he was reading with the
intention of going back to college as a matter of form, taking his
degree, and going into orders.  I could not but argue with myself that
here was the true explanation of his interest in poor Meltham, and that I
had been almost brutal in my distrust on that simple head.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VI. - A SKETCH OF LIFE IN THE PHILIPPINES.


House-keeping in the Philippines presents some interesting phases. Our
club of American officials decided to run a mess, so we employed a
cook and a house boy, then each of us provided himself with a personal
servant, making a total of six servants for four men--it takes about
this proportion of servants to live in any sort of comfort in the
Philippines--and launched ourselves boldly upon the sea of domestic
economy. But there were shoals ahead of us, for the question of
regulating servants is one of no small importance in the Philippines,
and one of its most disadvantageous features is the long chain of
dependents that usually attends it.

We gave the cooks so much a day with which to buy supplies in the
local market, for our own table, making him render a daily list of
expenditures, and a fixed amount besides to purchase rice and fish for
himself and the other servants. Of course, if they wished to vary
their diet and get chicken and fresh pork, which could be had at far
distant intervals, it was wholly a matter of their option, but the
allowance was made on the basis of so much rice and fish a day for
each. This allowance was about fifteen cents a day in Spanish coin per
servant.

Thus far all was well. We had agreed to give the cook eight dollars a
month in Spanish money, thinking that good wages would procure good
service, but the visions of affluence that floated before him on such
floods of wealth were so alluring that they drew him from the kitchen
to the cooler veranda. In less than a week he had employed an
assistant at four dollars a month; in less than another week that
assistant had employed him an assistant at two dollars a month; in
less than another week that assistant to the assistant had employed
him an assistant at the princely salary of fifty cents a month; and
from fear that the chain of dependents would end only by our having
the whole Filipino race attached to our culinary force, we broke up
house-keeping and went boarding again, choosing that as the less of
the two evils.

Our house furnishings were almost wholly Philippine. The table ware
and the food on the table came from the ends of the earth. The knives
and forks were made in Germany, the plates were manufactured in
England, the glass ware and table cloth, in the United States. The
oatmeal and flour came from the United States also. The butter came
from Australia, the rice from China, the salt from Russia, and the
other eatables from sources about as various as their separate names.

Switzerland furnished the condensed milk and Illinois the canned
cream. Nearly all of the canned fruit bore labels from Spain.

Thus it can easily be seen that life in the Philippines, if lived
according to American ideals, is dependent upon a highly developed and
highly complex commerce. However, the difficulties of transportation
and the restriction of large stocks of merchandise to Manila and some
half a dozen other towns, make so great a difference between country
life and city life that a short comparison of the two will not be out
of place, and life in Manila may well be taken as being fairly typical
of the latter.

Life in Manila is pleasant, but expensive. It is pleasant from the
fact that it is not only the capital but also metropolis of the
archipelago. Thus the combination of wealth and high official position
has given to Manila a society of the highest and most refined type.

The process of beautifying and improving the city which is constantly
going on bids fair to give us at no distant day a city of which we may
well be proud.

But let him who intends living well in Manila on a small income bid
farewell at once to so idylic a dream, for it costs much to live well
there. In the city of Manila one can get almost anything he wishes,
but it must be paid for at the price it commands. Especially in the
case of eatables, this price is by no means small, because to the
first cost of articles must in most cases be added the expense of
distant shipment from American, European, or Australian ports, and not
infrequently the cost of long refrigeration must also be taken into
consideration. But, expensive though it is, it is very pleasant to
live there and those who have once enjoyed it often wish again to
quaff the cup of its delights.

In strong contrast to this pleasant life is the life of the quiet
little hamlet away in the distant islands. Indeed, the Filipino from
the distant town, who by some good fortune has been to Manila, or, by
a coup de main, has studied in one of the Manila colleges, is looked
up to in a true hero-worshiping attitude by all who either know him or
hear of his fame. Life in such a place is one long state of harmless
inactivity. Not a wave of trouble from the great outer world ever
disturbs its peaceful repose. One lounges forever in an air of
indolent ease and extreme aversion to anything approaching what might
be called a respectable effort.

One arises in the morning about the time the sun's first rays silver
the top leaves of the cocoanut trees and then stirs around until nine
or ten o'clock, when it is found expedient to avoid a further exposure
to the sun. From then until about five o'clock in the afternoon it is
best to take things as they come, even though one of those things be a
Filipino dinner. But then you may have your vehiclo attached to a
young bull with a ring in his nose and go for a drive. If it is the
dry season you will probably enjoy the drive unless you object to the
frequent clouds of dust swept along by the evening wind. If it is in
the rainy season your pleasure will depend to a considerable extent
upon how wet you get; but, whether the season be wet or dry, your
pleasure will be regulated largely by the state of harmony existing
between the driver and the bull.

In these quiet secluded nooks successive generations of Filipinos are
born, reared, grow old and die in an even chain of events broken only
by the occasional erection of a new grass house on the identical spot
where its predecessors have stood for ages. The son lives in the house
of his father, cultivates the same few square feet of soil planted in
edible roots, climbs the same cocoanut trees, follows the same winding
path down to the stream, pounds rice in the same mortar and with the
same stick that his ancestors have used from time unremembered, and,
in case of illness, curls up on a grass mat in a corner of the room
until he dies or by some good fortune recovers. Beyond this narrow
horizon he never looks. So narrow and contracted is the life that the
languages of two towns a few miles apart are so different that one
would scarcely recognize them as belonging to the same race of people.

Such are the two extremes of life in our new far Eastern provinces:
the one is active, progressive, and cosmopolitan; the other, inactive,
decadent, and narrow; but, whether one enjoys the first or endures the
second, there comes to him after leaving a longing to lounge again in
tropic airs and listen to the lullaby of the winds among the palms.


CHAPTER: IV.


FOR six or seven months I saw no more of Mr. Slinkton.  He called once at
my house, but I was not at home; and he once asked me to dine with him in
the Temple, but I was engaged.  His friend’s assurance was effected in
March.  Late in September or early in October I was down at Scarborough
for a breath of sea-air, where I met him on the beach.  It was a hot
evening; he came toward me with his hat in his hand; and there was the
walk I had felt so strongly disinclined to take in perfect order again,
exactly in front of the bridge of my nose.

He was not alone, but had a young lady on his arm.

She was dressed in mourning, and I looked at her with great interest.
She had the appearance of being extremely delicate, and her face was
remarkably pale and melancholy; but she was very pretty.  He introduced
her as his niece, Miss Niner.

‘Are you strolling, Mr. Sampson?  Is it possible you can be idle?’

It _was_ possible, and I _was_ strolling.

‘Shall we stroll together?’

‘With pleasure.’

The young lady walked between us, and we walked on the cool sea sand, in
the direction of Filey.

‘There have been wheels here,’ said Mr. Slinkton.  ‘And now I look again,
the wheels of a hand-carriage!  Margaret, my love, your shadow without
doubt!’

‘Miss Niner’s shadow?’ I repeated, looking down at it on the sand.

‘Not that one,’ Mr. Slinkton returned, laughing.  ‘Margaret, my dear,
tell Mr. Sampson.’

‘Indeed,’ said the young lady, turning to me, ‘there is nothing to
tell—except that I constantly see the same invalid old gentleman at all
times, wherever I go.  I have mentioned it to my uncle, and he calls the
gentleman my shadow.’

‘Does he live in Scarborough?’ I asked.

‘He is staying here.’

‘Do you live in Scarborough?’

‘No, I am staying here.  My uncle has placed me with a family here, for
my health.’

‘And your shadow?’ said I, smiling.

‘My shadow,’ she answered, smiling too, ‘is—like myself—not very robust,
I fear; for I lose my shadow sometimes, as my shadow loses me at other
times.  We both seem liable to confinement to the house.  I have not seen
my shadow for days and days; but it does oddly happen, occasionally, that
wherever I go, for many days together, this gentleman goes.  We have come
together in the most unfrequented nooks on this shore.’

‘Is this he?’ said I, pointing before us.

The wheels had swept down to the water’s edge, and described a great loop
on the sand in turning.  Bringing the loop back towards us, and spinning
it out as it came, was a hand-carriage, drawn by a man.

‘Yes,’ said Miss Niner, ‘this really is my shadow, uncle.’

As the carriage approached us and we approached the carriage, I saw
within it an old man, whose head was sunk on his breast, and who was
enveloped in a variety of wrappers.  He was drawn by a very quiet but
very keen-looking man, with iron-gray hair, who was slightly lame.  They
had passed us, when the carriage stopped, and the old gentleman within,
putting out his arm, called to me by my name.  I went back, and was
absent from Mr. Slinkton and his niece for about five minutes.

When I rejoined them, Mr. Slinkton was the first to speak.  Indeed, he
said to me in a raised voice before I came up with him:

‘It is well you have not been longer, or my niece might have died of
curiosity to know who her shadow is, Mr. Sampson.’

‘An old East India Director,’ said I.  ‘An intimate friend of our
friend’s, at whose house I first had the pleasure of meeting you.  A
certain Major Banks.  You have heard of him?’

‘Never.’

‘Very rich, Miss Niner; but very old, and very crippled.  An amiable man,
sensible—much interested in you.  He has just been expatiating on the
affection that he has observed to exist between you and your uncle.’

Mr. Slinkton was holding his hat again, and he passed his hand up the
straight walk, as if he himself went up it serenely, after me.

‘Mr. Sampson,’ he said, tenderly pressing his niece’s arm in his, ‘our
affection was always a strong one, for we have had but few near ties.  We
have still fewer now.  We have associations to bring us together, that
are not of this world, Margaret.’

‘Dear uncle!’ murmured the young lady, and turned her face aside to hide
her tears.

‘My niece and I have such remembrances and regrets in common, Mr.
Sampson,’ he feelingly pursued, ‘that it would be strange indeed if the
relations between us were cold or indifferent.  If I remember a
conversation we once had together, you will understand the reference I
make.  Cheer up, dear Margaret.  Don’t droop, don’t droop.  My Margaret!
I cannot bear to see you droop!’

The poor young lady was very much affected, but controlled herself.  His
feelings, too, were very acute.  In a word, he found himself under such
great need of a restorative, that he presently went away, to take a bath
of sea-water, leaving the young lady and me sitting by a point of rock,
and probably presuming—but that you will say was a pardonable indulgence
in a luxury—that she would praise him with all her heart.

She did, poor thing!  With all her confiding heart, she praised him to
me, for his care of her dead sister, and for his untiring devotion in her
last illness.  The sister had wasted away very slowly, and wild and
terrible fantasies had come over her toward the end, but he had never
been impatient with her, or at a loss; had always been gentle, watchful,
and self-possessed.  The sister had known him, as she had known him, to
be the best of men, the kindest of men, and yet a man of such admirable
strength of character, as to be a very tower for the support of their
weak natures while their poor lives endured.

‘I shall leave him, Mr. Sampson, very soon,’ said the young lady; ‘I know
my life is drawing to an end; and when I am gone, I hope he will marry
and be happy.  I am sure he has lived single so long, only for my sake,
and for my poor, poor sister’s.’

The little hand-carriage had made another great loop on the damp sand,
and was coming back again, gradually spinning out a slim figure of eight,
half a mile long.

‘Young lady,’ said I, looking around, laying my hand upon her arm, and
speaking in a low voice, ‘time presses.  You hear the gentle murmur of
that sea?’

She looked at me with the utmost wonder and alarm, saying, ‘Yes!’

‘And you know what a voice is in it when the storm comes?’

‘Yes!’

‘You see how quiet and peaceful it lies before us, and you know what an
awful sight of power without pity it might be, this very night!’

‘Yes!’

‘But if you had never heard or seen it, or heard of it in its cruelty,
could you believe that it beats every inanimate thing in its way to
pieces, without mercy, and destroys life without remorse?’

‘You terrify me, sir, by these questions!’

‘To save you, young lady, to save you!  For God’s sake, collect your
strength and collect your firmness!  If you were here alone, and hemmed
in by the rising tide on the flow to fifty feet above your head, you
could not be in greater danger than the danger you are now to be saved
from.’

The figure on the sand was spun out, and straggled off into a crooked
little jerk that ended at the cliff very near us.

‘As I am, before Heaven and the Judge of all mankind, your friend, and
your dead sister’s friend, I solemnly entreat you, Miss Niner, without
one moment’s loss of time, to come to this gentleman with me!’

If the little carriage had been less near to us, I doubt if I could have
got her away; but it was so near that we were there before she had
recovered the hurry of being urged from the rock.  I did not remain there
with her two minutes.  Certainly within five, I had the inexpressible
satisfaction of seeing her—from the point we had sat on, and to which I
had returned—half supported and half carried up some rude steps notched
in the cliff, by the figure of an active man.  With that figure beside
her, I knew she was safe anywhere.

I sat alone on the rock, awaiting Mr. Slinkton’s return.  The twilight
was deepening and the shadows were heavy, when he came round the point,
with his hat hanging at his button-hole, smoothing his wet hair with one
of his hands, and picking out the old path with the other and a
pocket-comb.

‘My niece not here, Mr. Sampson?’ he said, looking about.

‘Miss Niner seemed to feel a chill in the air after the sun was down, and
has gone home.’

He looked surprised, as though she were not accustomed to do anything
without him; even to originate so slight a proceeding.

‘I persuaded Miss Niner,’ I explained.

‘Ah!’ said he.  ‘She is easily persuaded—for her good.  Thank you, Mr.
Sampson; she is better within doors.  The bathing-place was farther than
I thought, to say the truth.’

‘Miss Niner is very delicate,’ I observed.

He shook his head and drew a deep sigh.  ‘Very, very, very.  You may
recollect my saying so.  The time that has since intervened has not
strengthened her.  The gloomy shadow that fell upon her sister so early
in life seems, in my anxious eyes, to gather over her, ever darker, ever
darker.  Dear Margaret, dear Margaret!  But we must hope.’

The hand-carriage was spinning away before us at a most indecorous pace
for an invalid vehicle, and was making most irregular curves upon the
sand.  Mr. Slinkton, noticing it after he had put his handkerchief to his
eyes, said:

‘If I may judge from appearances, your friend will be upset, Mr.
Sampson.’

‘It looks probable, certainly,’ said I.

‘The servant must be drunk.’

‘The servants of old gentlemen will get drunk sometimes,’ said I.

‘The major draws very light, Mr. Sampson.’

‘The major does draw light,’ said I.

By this time the carriage, much to my relief, was lost in the darkness.
We walked on for a little, side by side over the sand, in silence.  After
a short while he said, in a voice still affected by the emotion that his
niece’s state of health had awakened in him,

‘Do you stay here long, Mr. Sampson?’

‘Why, no.  I am going away to-night.’

‘So soon?  But business always holds you in request.  Men like Mr.
Sampson are too important to others, to be spared to their own need of
relaxation and enjoyment.’

‘I don’t know about that,’ said I.  ‘However, I am going back.’

‘To London?’

‘To London.’

‘I shall be there too, soon after you.’

I knew that as well as he did.  But I did not tell him so.  Any more than
I told him what defensive weapon my right hand rested on in my pocket, as
I walked by his side.  Any more than I told him why I did not walk on the
sea side of him with the night closing in.

We left the beach, and our ways diverged.  We exchanged good-night, and
had parted indeed, when he said, returning,

‘Mr. Sampson, _may_ I ask?  Poor Meltham, whom we spoke of,—dead yet?’

‘Not when I last heard of him; but too broken a man to live long, and
hopelessly lost to his old calling.’

‘Dear, dear, dear!’ said he, with great feeling.  ‘Sad, sad, sad!  The
world is a grave!’  And so went his way.

It was not his fault if the world were not a grave; but I did not call
that observation after him, any more than I had mentioned those other
things just now enumerated.  He went his way, and I went mine with all
expedition.  This happened, as I have said, either at the end of
September or beginning of October.  The next time I saw him, and the last
time, was late in November.


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some measure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-progressionists.  The latest authority, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this distant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks that they left the room in which he was exhibiting, and,
assembling in prayer, entreated to be relieved of the devil who had come
amongst them.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a miscalculation, which the Boer pointed out, appealing to his
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh, this is a ready-reckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illustration of their simplicity is to be found in the fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on their
way to Egypt, and, having reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls into the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordance with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptural names to their settlements and villages;
and if they were severe on the natives, and ruled them with a rod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similar manner to the Hivites and the
Hittites, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim on them.  It was to escape British rule that
they, with their wives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and their sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth into the wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King of the Zulus.  It was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile without interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would have settled, as did the Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If they had been allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been saved a
good deal of trouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away the emigration
required to develop the resources of a country happily situated in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed to beg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possession of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Pagans who have fled there from the cruelties of their native kings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Natal,
the English shopkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where the Boers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Cape Colony, Captain Aylward writes: “The coloured people are
tame, submissive, and industrious, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
through the Transvaal,” continues the same writer, “I saw in various
directions gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living in a condition of ordinary
propriety, having abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had not noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that we have made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determination not to be
English the women, according to Captain Aylward, have been a wonderful
aid to the men.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rich lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were white for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly lived in affluence but were now in comparative want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompanying the insecure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers by the savage, still rejected with scorn the idea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the men began to drop or lose courage they
urged them on to fresh exertions, and kept alive the spirit of resistance
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame has nothing but praise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parishioners.  The honours which the Dutch lavish on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farmer gives his guest the best entertainment he can
provide, and “before the family retires to rest the large Bible is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the residence of a rich Dutch farmer, who
refused admission to his house and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leading the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a religions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Arthur writes:—“There are no finer young men in the world
than the young Dutch Boers, who are generally of immense height and size,
and very hardy.  Their life is spent in the open air by day, and
frequently at night they sleep on the veldt, with no tent or covering.

Men more fit for the Grenadier Guards, as to personal appearance, could
not be found.  Some of them are plucky.  A Boer had part of his hand
blown off by the bursting of his gun.  Having no doctor near, he directed
his son to bring his hammer and chisel, and shape off his fingers.”  As
an Irishman, Captain Aylward is enthusiastic as regards the personal
charms of the ladies.  Many of the elder ones even, he admits, are not
uncomely, and in the wild neighbourhood of Lydenberg itself, he tells us,
are to be seen some bearing traces of beauty of no ordinary character,
whose lives, he says, somewhat unnecessarily, are useful, adorning, and
cheering the homes of their husbands and children.  These people are
somewhat unlettered, and very phlegmatic.  “They do not wish,” writes Sir
Arthur Cunynghame, “to move ten miles from their own door, nor to see one
who comes from ten miles beyond it.”  Their moral discipline also seems
somewhat severe.  “In the little fort,” writes Captain Aylward, “was an
English storekeeper, named Glynn, whose daughters had a piano, on which
they would occasionally play dance and other profane music.  This was a
source of great annoyance to their pious neighbours, who, in many
respects, resembled our early Puritans.  It was requested that the piano
should be silenced, as the music might tempt the anger of Heaven if
persisted in during a time of war and trial.  If a girl in the laager
were frivolous or light in her conduct, she was liable to be arrested,
and brought for trial before the Fathers of the Church, from whom she
might receive a severe caution, or even the punishment of removal.”  At
Lydenberg, at the time of Sir Arthur’s visit, an altercation had taken
place on the unrighteousness of dancing, for which a party was tried by
the Synod; but an appeal was made to the Court, and this appeal formed an
important epoch in the history of the town.  To show how primitive these
Boers are, let us take the following story:—A schoolmaster was lately
appointed in Zoutspanberg.  One of his earliest lessons was to teach the
children that the world turned upon its own axis.  He also endeavoured to
make them understand the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.  The
children went home, and were impertinent to their parents, and told them
that the earth went round the sun.  The elders of the district met, and
consulted regarding these new doctrines, and finally agreed to refer the
subject to the minister, who requested the schoolmaster to explain.  The
schoolmaster said, “I teach them nothing but the movements of the
heavenly bodies, and that the earth revolves round the sun.”  The
minister answered, “Well, this may be true, no doubt, and what the earth
does in Holland; but it would be more convenient at present if in the
Zoutspanberg you would allow the sun still to go round the earth for a
few years longer.  We do not like sudden changes in such matters.”  The
schoolmaster took the hint, and the sun continued to go round the earth
as usual.  The power of the minister of a parish is very great.  A great
deal depends upon him for the improvement and well-being of the town.

Many a time it was said to Sir Arthur, when he observed that a town was
flourishing, “Yes, we are fortunate in our minister;” and when it was
falling back it was, “Ah! all will alter when we get rid of our present
minister.”

It is to the credit of these people that they have a consistent native
policy.  No faith is to be held with Rome.  “Delenda est Carthago” is
their motto.  They leave the natives to quarrel among themselves, while
our English policy has been to play off one petty savage chief against
another, and to arm and strengthen the natives with whom we are
ultimately to fight.  The natives see through this, and argue, as Sir
Arthur Cunynghame testifies, that the English fear them, else why, they
ask, do they give them such high wages? or why do the Government allow
them to buy arms?  It is some such feeling that has urged on Cetewayo
into his present hostile attitude.  He considered that we were his allies
against the Boers, and thought we annexed the Transvaal for him and his
savage followers.  Up to the annexation he and the English were on
friendly terms.  It seems that the Boers are reluctant to fight for
English rule, and some of the colonial papers hint that they are a danger
and a menace.  No wonder, as we have always sacrificed them to the
natives.  The Free States newspaper complains that “our British
neighbours have established at the Diamond Fields free trade in guns and
ammunition, in spite of all treaties with the Republic, and even in spite
of their own professed policy in the Cape Colony.  Griqualand West
permits the supply of guns and ammunition to the natives—Zulus and
Basutos—without hindrance, whilst Earl Carnarvon requests all South
Africa to meet in a friendly conference, because of the native question
and Zulu difficulty.  British traders supply Her Majesty’s enemies, and
our enemies too, with guns and ammunition to any extent, in order that
these enemies may be better prepared to fight us when the next struggle
may commence; and, worst of all, British commerce, represented by
colonial shopkeepers and merchants, who, to fill their own pockets, would
not for a moment hesitate to bring ruin on the colonial farmers and
Republican Boers, cry out that it is preposterous to stop the trade in
guns.”  Assuredly, the Boers may well complain of the Imperial policy in
South Africa.  There is little to be said for our dealings with them
after they had removed out of our rule.  That we had no right to annex
the Diamond Fields, the sum we offered in compensation may be considered
as fair evidence; and the annexation of the Transvaal, besides being a
crime, was a blunder for which we are now paying dearly in person and in
purse.  It has bean shown that the cry for annexation raised was merely
“an ignorant expression of the dissatisfaction of a mean and contemptible
minority”—a set of greedy speculators and disreputable office-seekers,
who grossly deceived the English officials, who were not naturally averse
to the power and prestige a new command would give them.  The Republic
was not insolvent, nor was it unable to hold its own.  In the war with
the Basutos, contrary to the assertion of Mr. Trollope, the Burghers were
everywhere victorious, nor was it stained with slavery, as, if so, when
Sir Theophilus Shepstone annexed it, we should have heard of a wholesale
emancipation; nor was the step taken by the will of the people.  The only
argument for the step was that we were obliged to take it in order to
prevent our own house catching fire, and the result has been the
conflagration we were so anxious to avoid.  Sir Theophilus Shepstone
annexed the Transvaal, and our house caught fire in the Cape Colony, and
in Griqualand West, and Secocoeni broke out; and, lastly, we have the
tragedy of Isandula.  We shall never be safe till we have the Transvaal,
argued Sir Theophilus Shepstone and his friends.  Now, argue the latter,
that we have the Transvaal, we are bound to go to war.  This reasoning
was irresistible to Lord Chelmsford, who, in a despatch dated September
last, says, “So long as Natal and the Transvaal had separate interests,
the policy of the chief of the Zulu nation was to play off the former
against the latter. . . .  With the annexation of the Transvaal this
state of things virtually came to an end.”

Ex uno disce omnes.  One example will suffice of the way in which that
theory of dominion universal, from, the Cape to the Zambesi, which
appears to dominate over the official Englishman, when he has anything to
do with Africa, acts in a mischievous manner, may be seen in the case of
Griqualand East, formerly called No Man’s Land, which was some years
since a sort of neutral territory.  In time the Griquas, or bastards,
settled there.  They were an industrious people, and far more advanced in
civilisation than any other native tribe.  They had large flocks of
cattle and sheep, and were wealthy, with good furniture and houses, and
prospered under the rule of their President, Adam Kok.  Many new
buildings, such as churches and schools, were being erected when Sir
Arthur Cunynghame visited them, and many new stores put up.  He writes:
“In the afternoon we attended the native service carried on in the Dutch
language.  It was impossible for me to follow it; in fact, the discovery
that the sermon related to the Prodigal Son formed the limit of my
knowledge of what was going on.  The congregation appeared attentive, and
the clergyman in earnest.”  Not long after the visit, it was decided by
the British that they should annex the country, and Adam Kok was
pensioned off with a thousand a year, which he did not, however, long
enjoy, as he was soon killed by a carriage accident.  At a meeting of the
people on the subject, Captain Adam Kok complained, as, indeed, he had
every reason to do, of the hasty and arbitrary manner in which Government
were assuming authority in his country.  They had their own cannon,
fire-arms, and ammunition, bought with their own money, and after being
left for thirteen years entirely to their own resources, without any
preliminary notice he said, the Cape Government stepped coolly in and
took possession of them and their property.  When the Government laid out
the Kat River Settlement of Hottentots, they gave the settlers seed,
corn, ploughs, and various other things to help them.  But the Griquas
were not so treated.  They had to do everything for themselves, and we
were bound to regard them not as enemies to be put down, but as friendly
allies to be encouraged and preserved.

How long is this system to be pursued?  The Transvaal is getting into a
worse state every day.  It has vast resources which cannot be developed.

It is importing flour, when it might be a great corn-producing country.

It has no manufactures, and its exports are few.  Captain Aylward writes:
“The Boer party complain bitterly of the annexation.  They say our
liberties have been unnecessarily taken from us, and our country annexed,
not only against the will of the majority, but in utter defiance of Lord
Carnarvon’s instructions, which state that no such proclamation shall be
issued by you (Sir Theophilus Shepstone), unless you shall be certain
that the inhabitants, or a sufficient number of them, or the Legislature,
desire to become our subjects.”  The Boers also object to the annexation,
because they believe that the arguments put forward by Sir Theophilus
Shepstone are not borne out by facts, and they are still more angry
because they believe the annexation was brought about by false pretences,
accompanied and strengthened by attacks made upon their honour and
character by a party Press interested in their destruction.  They say
further, that the terms of the Annexation Proclamation have not been
adhered to, and this party, undoubtedly the strongest in the country,
appeals to England to do them justice and restore to them their country.

The railway party who want a connection with the natural outlet of the
Transvaal, Delagoa Bay, are discontented, and so are the very men who
were the first to applaud annexation.  As it is, it seems, the Transvaal
must end either in anarchy or martial law, and will be a heavy burden on
the British taxpayer for many years to come.  Mr. Trollops himself admits
that it is not easy to justify what we have done in the Transvaal.  “If
there be,” he writes, “any laws of right and wrong, by which nations
should govern themselves in their dealings with other nations, it is hard
to find the law in conformity with which that act was done.”  And Mr.
Trollope is right.  Undoubtedly it was an act of injustice of which we
have not yet seen the bitter end.  There is little chance of that
injustice being undone.  The Dutch are poor and far away.  It is the old,
old story of the wolf and the lamb over again.  We have made so little of
South Africa, we might leave the Boers alone.  All that we can say
against them is that when it was the fashion for West Indian planters to
maltreat their slaves, they often did the same.

The Boers are becoming more discontented, as well they may, and there is
no sign of this discontent ceasing.  In the beginning of February they
held a large meeting at Wonderfontein to receive the report of the visit
of the deputation, Messrs. Kruger and Joubert, to Europe.  The latter is
reported to have said:—“My brethren and fellow-countrymen,—I am very glad
to see you all spared by God in this our beloved country.  I wish and
hope the best, also, with regard to your families.  You have deputed us
on a mission of the utmost importance to yourselves.  I know you are
awaiting our report with deep anxiety.  I know your feelings and your
wishes—aye, I share your anxiety, and, therefore, I will not detain you
long by words.  Know, then, that I cannot report to you so favourably as
you had expected that the all-powerful British Empire had acknowledged
your rights so that you may, as had been said by Joshua to Caleb, be
strong and possess the country which God has given you.  No, brethren,
England has annexed your country, and will keep it, and I may not mislead
you by not telling you that you cannot stop the superior power of
England.  Therefore, take heed for yourselves, and don’t do anything of
which you may repent for ever, and which may plunge yourselves, your
families, and others into deeper misery still.  Pray to God for wisdom;
be prudent, and act wisely.  Who knows, God may help us and grant relief.

You had sent us to ask back your independence.  What we have done for it
you already know from the newspapers, and the rest you will learn from
the books or pamphlets which we had printed.  In how far you will decide
that we have done our duty we leave to you.  I do not care for myself,
but I do for the country, and the people, and where I feel my own
shortcomings and weakness, I am satisfied before God and my conscience
that I, if I have not obtained what you, what I, and the people have
desired, I have done for it what I could.  And with this I wish God’s
greatest blessing for yourselves and the country.”  Other speeches were
delivered of a more angry and exciting character.  It was intimated that
we got our Empire by robbery.  Mr. W. Pretorious said the High
Commissioner promised much, but all he wanted was to get back his
independence.  Said another speaker, amidst enthusiastic cheers, England
might annex and oppress them, but it could never give them an English
heart.  Some resolutions were moved, of which the following was one:—“The
committee, supported by the people, cannot be satisfied with the reply of
the English Minister, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, and resolve to continue to
protest against the injustice committed, and, further, to devise ways and
means with the people for attaining their object.”  After the meeting,
some people having torn to pieces the printed copies of Sir Bartle
Frere’s letter, Mr. Joubert strongly condemned the stupid proceedings,
and requested the people to act wisely and with judgment.  On the Sunday
religious services were held, and on Monday a further meeting took place.

Ultimately it was resolved, “That the committee, having learned the
opinion of the people expressed in their memorials, and the expressed
wish of the people not to submit to British supremacy, but to abide by
the protest of April 11, 1877, proposes to the committee a deputation to
acquaint Sir Bartle Frere therewith, and at the same time to assure His
Excellency of their full co-operation for the advancement of the whole of
South Africa, provided the annexation be rescinded.”  Clearly, when we
have settled with Cetewayo, we shall have a little trouble with the free
people of the Transvaal.  According to the Natal Mercury, we had better
leave them alone.

The following, says the Natal Witness, is a translation of the oath of
mutual allegiance taken by a great number of respectable Transvaal Boers
at the Wonderfontein meeting.  It will strike most people that this oath
is the oath of men who are to be respected.  It will also strike them
that such men are likely to secure the sympathy of the great bulk of the
English nation:—“In the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of hearts,
and praying for His gracious assistance and mercy, we, burghers of the
South African Republic, have solemnly agreed, for us and for our
children, to unite in a holy covenant, which we confirm with a solemn
oath.  It is now forty years ago since our fathers left the Cape Colony
to become a free and independent people.  These forty years were forty
years of sorrow and suffering.  We have founded Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the South African Republic, and three times has the English
Government trampled on our liberty.  And our flag, baptized with the
blood and tears of our fathers, has been pulled down.  As by a thief in
the night has our free Republic been stolen from us.  We cannot suffer
this and we may not.  It is the will of God that the unity of our fathers
and the love to our children should oblige us to deliver unto our
children, unblemished, the heritage of our fathers.  It is for this
reason that we here unite, and give each other the hand as men and
brethren, solemnly promising to be faithful to our country and people,
and looking unto God, to work together unto death for the restoration of
the liberty of our Republic.  So truly help us, God Almighty.”

Till Sir Bartle Frere appeared upon the scene at the Cape men ridiculed
the idea of another Kaffir war.  Now all is changed.  The following is an
extract from a letter, dated February 12, received by a gentleman in
London from a well-known merchant at the Cape:—“Who is responsible for
the fearful loss of life which has taken place in Zululand?  This is now
the question of all questions; but we fear that it will drop out of
sight, as the iniquitous proceedings perpetrated here during the late
so-called war have done.  The Zulus will, of course, be crushed, as
‘Might is Right’ seems now to be England’s motto.  Sir Bartle Frere and
Lord Chelmsford must answer for the part they have played, and for the
consequences of the tragedy they have caused.  Never was there a greater
mistake than the Frere-Sprigg native policy.  We have not right on our
side, and we have not the force to carry it out, even if we had.  We have
made enemies of the loyal Gaikas, of the Basutos, of the Fingoes, of the
Zulus, and of every other tribe in South Africa, by our harsh and unjust
treatment of them.  The appointment of Sir Bartle Frere as Governor, and
of Mr. Sprigg and his party to power, are the greatest misfortunes which
have befallen this country for fifty years.”

The South African correspondent of the Daily News, writing from
Maritzburg, March 2, says:—“It is now only too evident to every one that
Sir Bartle Frere’s policy has been most mischievous in its effects upon
South African interests.  More has been done since he landed at Capetown,
two years ago, to produce discord and unsettlement than, it is to be
feared, can be undone for many years to come.  Friendly tribes have been
exasperated; colonists have been ridden over rough-shod, and now it would
seem that the High Commissioner is bent on bringing about the last and
final evil, by engaging in a war of conquest with the Transvaal Boers.

There is a strong and increasing feeling throughout South Africa that the
annexation of the Transvaal must be reversed.  When that act took place
it met with very wide approval, for two reasons—first, because it was
believed that the majority of the Boers were consenting parties; and
next, because it was believed that the act might tend to bring the two
great European nationalities closer together.  The return of the second
Transvaal deputation has brought to light the fact that the majority of
the Boers were by no means consenting parties.  They complain, too, and
justly, that not one of the promises made at the time of the annexation
has been fulfilled.  If the acts of the annexation were repealed, and
time allowed for the bitter feelings engendered by it to subside, there
is little doubt that the Boers would be found willing to come into some
sort of confederation with the other South African States, and there can
be no doubt that if the Transvaal came in willingly the Free State, whose
capital, Bloemfontein, is regarded by many as the natural capital of
South Africa, would come in also.”

What is to be the end of our system of annexation in South Africa?  Our
Consuls far away from the healthy criticism of the English Press, and
possibly better trained in ancient than modern history, dream imperial
dreams, and the public at home applauds when a magnificent success crowns
their work.  In the case of Sir Bartle Frere there has been a failure,
and he will have to pay the penalty; while demagogues who, like the
Irishman who when landed in America, and asked for his vote for the
opposition candidate, immediately promised it, remarking he was “again
all Government,” see in the failure the hand of Earl Beaconsfield, and
hold him up to scorn and contempt.  It is clear what has been done at the
Cape is only in accordance with the whole past of colonial rule, not
merely there, but in every quarter of the globe.  We could not leave the
Boers alone, who stood as buffers between us and the surrounding savages.

We must follow them over desert and plain and swamp and river and rock
and bush.  The colonist reaped, at any rate, a benefit from such a
policy, for he made profitable contracts for his waggons and horses, and
there was a refreshing stream of English gold, which otherwise would have
been dried up.  The Book of Nature might say, Leave the Boers and the
savages alone; but to a highly-cultured people the Book of Nature is a
blank, and the passions and prejudices, and fears and hopes, of the
passing hour are the only considerations by which the public and the
puppets it places in office are moved.  Some of us still talk of the New
Testament; but he who were to quote it, even after Mr. Speaker had said
the prayers, in our High Court of Parliament, as bearing in any way on
national policy, would be as much laughed at as Dr. Kenealy or Major
O’Gorman.  Meanwhile time will solve the problem—the storm will blow
over.  The mob and the pictorial papers will glorify the returning heroes
who have crushed a savage who was mad enough to defy on his own behalf
and on that of his people the British power, and the British public will
have to pay the bill—not, unfortunately, the hard-working, over-taxed
working man; he is a myth, as much so as a mermaid or a griffin; but that
large middle-class, on whom the tax-gatherer instinctively preys; who
have been shorn so often that it has become to them a second nature; who
have been the mainstay of the country, but who are fast becoming, under
the weight of Imperial taxation for Imperial schemes, an extinct race.