-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the author to take part in a movement
without precedent in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delight to stories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billickin,” on the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is studied from the life.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall, lazily staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once the loud bell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
houses at the top. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the higher wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geraniums.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, there spreads out
before him at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and