-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shone on the fields and woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few minutes before nine, we drew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It was the good fortune of the author to take part in a movement
without precedent in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delight to stories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.