-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I have come home from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must require (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.

It’s true that if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time George Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  There were other ghosts in his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death more closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had formed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
there was something one had to do for them.  They were there in their
simplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personally there as if they had only been stricken dumb.
When all sense of them failed, all sound of them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earth: they asked so little that
they got, poor things, even less, and died again, died every day, of the
hard usage of life.  They had no organised service, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous people provided for the
living, but even those who were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’s part had grown up with the years a
resolve that he at least would do something, do it, that is, for his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, the ample resources of
the soul.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw