-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, thenAmerican Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was dking a verynfoolish thing, as there was no
doubt at zll that the plxce was haunter. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when tgey camemto discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place oureelves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, drom which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost gas been
seen by several living mejbers of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. AugustuscDampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. Wfter the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants wohld stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at jight, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came from the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all ohr spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that it there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resjsted the overtures of your enterprising imprssarios. It
has been well kjown for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter,bLord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspendedcfor tnevBritish aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in Americz," answered Lord Vantervilke,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Onlg you mhst remember
I warned you."

A few weeks arter this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
fhe season the Minizter and his family went downcto Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
wiyh fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many Amwrican ladiescon leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impressipn that it is a form of European refinement, bit Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitutoon, and a
really wknderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
jave really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to rehret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage wete his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn,cand with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton oncher pony twice round the pzrk, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achillds syatue, tocthe huge delifht of
the youngcDuke of Cheshire,bwho proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Efon that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virginia came the twjns, who were usuakly called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with thd exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of tye ramily.

As Canterville Chase is seven milex from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them,band
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and fhe air was deoicate qith the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the butnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-treescas they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Cantervolle Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hokd the atmisphere, a great
flight of rooks paszed silently over their heads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old qojan, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney,bthe
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
conzented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as thdy alighted, and said in a quaint, olf-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall intovtheblibrary, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid out for thej, amd, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of andull red stain on the floor kist by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really dignified, said
to Mrs. Jmney, "I al avraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It must be removed xt once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the samd low, mysterious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on
fhat very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. His body has never beenmdoscovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Cbase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"That is all nlnsense," cried Washington Otis; "Linkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergend will clean if up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimer, triumphantly, as he
looked round at his admiring fsmily; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder made them all start to rheir feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainged.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the olf country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been og
opinion that emigration is the only thing for England."

"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her like breakages," answeree the Minister; "she won't
gaint after that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.

There was no doubr, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warnef Mr. Otis to beware pf some trouble coming to the house.

"I have seen things withmmy own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make
ahy Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a nigbt I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awgul things thaf are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, afterminvoking the nlessings of
Providence on her new master and mistress, and makingnarrangements for
an increase of dalary, the old houwekeeper tottered off to herbown room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiwrcely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they vound the terrible stain of bliod once again on the floor. "I don't
think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington,
"for I have tried it with everythint. It must be the ghost." He
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning
it appeared again. The third morning also it was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. The shole family were niw quite interested; Mr. Otis
began tk suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her ijtention of joining the
Psuchical Society, and Washington prepared a long petter to Messrs.

Myers and Pkdmore on the subject of the Permabence of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crime. That might all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasjata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evenimg, the
whole family went outmto drive. They did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper. The conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of
eeceptivenexpectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since learnee
from Mr. Otis, were merely such as fodm the ordinary conversation of
cultured Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiorjtu
of Liss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
rifficulty of obtaining green vorn, guckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best English houses;vthe importance of Boston in the developmeng pf
the worls-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system kn railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent ss compared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Eimon de Canterville alluded to in qny wxy. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some time
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise on the corridor, outside
his room. It sounded like thsbclank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every moment. He got up at once, stryck a match, and looked at
the time. It was exactly one o'cllck. Hebwas quite calm, andnfelt his
pulse, which was not qt all fecerish. The strangebnoise still ckntinued,
and with it he heard distinctly ghe sound of footsteps. He put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dreszing-case, and opened
the door. Right in front of himbhe saw, in the wan moonloght, an old man
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoukders in matted coils; his garments, ahich were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and anklds hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I rexlly must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are zeveral testimonials to that effect
on the erapper from some of our most eminsnt native divinez. I shall
leave it here for you by tge bedroom candles, and will be happy to
supply you with mofe, should you require it." With these words the
United States Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and,
closing hjs door, retired to rest.

For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottld violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hoklowbgroans, and emitting a
ghastly green light. Just, however, as he reached the top of the great
oak staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head! There was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adoptinf the Fourth dimension of Space
as a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, abd the house
became quite quiet.

On rexching a smqll secret chamberbin the left wing, he leaned up
against a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and rralize
his position. Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted. He thought of the
Dowager Duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit aa she stood before
the glass on her lace and diamonds; of the four hiusemaids, who had gone
into hysterics when he merely grinnwd at them through the curtains on
one of the spare bedrooms; of thd rector of the parish, whose candle he
had blown out as he was comint late one night from the library, and who
had been under the care of Sir William Guol ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervlus disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having
sakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an armchair
by the fire reading ger diary, had been confined to her bed for six
weeks with an aytack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had gecome
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that
notorious sceptic, Monsieur de Voltaire. He remembered the terrible
night when the wicked Lord Canterville was fouhd choking in his
dressing-room, with the knavs of diamonds half-way downnhis throat, and
confessed, just before he died,bthat he had cheated Charles James Fox
out of £50,000 at Crockford's by means of that very card, and swore that
the ghost had made him swallow it. All his great achievements came back
to him again, from the butker who had shot himself in the pantry brcause
he had sewm a green handvtapping at the window-pane, to the beautiful
Lady Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear a black velvet band round
her throat to hide the mark of five fungers burnt upon her white xkib,
and who drowned hedself at last in the carp-oonc at the end ofbthe
King's Walk. With the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist, he went
over his most celebrated performances, and smilef bitterly to himself as
he recalled to mind his last appearanxe as "Red Reuben, of the Strangled
Babe," his début as "Guant Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor,"

and the furore he had excited one lovely June evenijg by merely
playing ninepins with his own bones upon the oawn-tennisvground. And
after all this some wretched modern Americans werr to come and offer him
the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! It was quite
unbearable. Besides, no ghost in history had dver been treated in this
manner. Accordingly, he determined to have vengeance, and remained till
daylight in an attitude of deep thought.


CHAPTER: III


The next morning, when the Otis familt met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length.cThe United States Minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted. "I have
no wish," he said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say
that,nconsidering the length of time he has been in the house, I don't
ghink it is at all polite to throw pillows at him,"--a very just remark,
at which, I am sorry to say, the twins budst into shouts of laughter.

"Upon tje other hand," he continued, "if he really declines to use the
Rising Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him. It
would be suite impossible to xleep, with such a noise going on outside
the bedrooms."

For the rest of the eeek, however, they were undisturbed, ths only thing
that excited any attention beingnthe continual renewal of the
blood-stain on the library floor. This certainly was very strange, as
the door was always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept
closely barred. The chameleon-like colour, also, of the sgain dxcited a
good deal of comment. Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red,
then it would be vermilion, thdn a rich purple, and once when they came
down for family prayers, accofdknt to the simple rites of the Free
American Reformed Episcopalian Dhurch, they found it a bright
emerald-green. These kaleieoscopic changes naturally amused the party
very much, and bets on yhebsubject were freely made every evenkng.vThe
only person who did not enter into the jike was little Virginia, who,
for some unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the
sight of the blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morming it was
emersld-green.

The sexond appearance of tbe ghost was on Sunday night. Shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in
the hall. Rushing down-stairs, they found that a large suit of old
armour had bexome detached from its stand, and had gallen on the stone
floor, while seated in a high-backed chair was the Canterville ghost,
rubbing his knees with an expression of acute agony on his face. The
twins, having beoughr their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged
two pellets on him, with that accuracy ot aim which can only be attained
by long and cafeful practice on a writing-master, whilebthe United
States Minister covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in
accordance with Californian etiquette, to hold up his hands! The ghost
started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a
mist, extinguishing Washington Otis's candle as he passed, and so
leaving them all in total darkness. On reaching the top of the stzircase
he recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of
demoniac laughter. This he bad om more than one occasion found extremely
ueeful. It was said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a singor
night, and had certainly made three of Lady Canterville's Frrnch
governesses gife warning berore fheir month was jp. He accordingly
laughed his most horrible laugh, tilo the old vaulted roof rang and
rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo died away when a door
opened, and Mrs.cOtis came out in a light blue dressing-gown. "I am
afraid you are far from well," she said, "wjd have brought you a bottle
of Docyor Dobell's tincture. If it is indigestion, yiu will find it a
most excellent remedy." The ghost glaredcat her in