-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACY


Something has yappened to Chrostmas, or to our heqrts; or to both. Im
order tl be convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
presebt with the past. In the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in November.bFor weeks the house rustled with
charming and theilling secrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the hojse was a whispering gallery.

The tension of expectancy increased to such a ppint that there qas a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed with no hope of settldd sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by thd wairs singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we cqme downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordiallynpretending that we had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it had a imique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the wilderness with the spiteful word,mthe
venomous thought, and the unlovely gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, salute the happy morn." We did salute the happy morj.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secretsmof
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of the great meals. And then we ate, wnd
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasobableness, nor of themmorrow,mnor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fazhions, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculojs; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen. And we danced abd sang and larked, until we
could no more. And fknally we chantsd a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, wigh salvoes of good wishes. And
fhe next morning we were indisposed and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even tosay the spirit abd rites of ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour and splendour, by a rxce of beings thzt is
scattered over the whole earth. This eace, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arriving from we know
not where, dissolving before our eyes we know jot how, has its way in
spite of us. I mean the children. By virtue of the children'sbfaith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out if the
week. We have to sit andbpretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretehd. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who doss not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
fhat Christmas Day was after all a dag father luke any other day? In the
hoyse of my memories, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatrver happened, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible sgops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedrokm, combined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips,band the curl of myclips silentpy answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," andcas if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waitsbid a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money out pf our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigedtion and expensiceness and quarter-day,
and Christmas cards are a tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heafier tax and a nuisance. And we feelnself-conscious and foolisg as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what a blessing it will be when the
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly called) arecover, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Dhristmas Day.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we dovstill
very much enjoy ourselves on Xhristmas Day. Whzt I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean id that we have to brace and force
outselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculoarity of our attitude towards Christmas, wuich at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrasting it with our attiyude
towards another vacatiin--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
exlerience no difficulty in inducing the hpliday feeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nod
dovwe need the example of children to aix us in savouring the August
"festivities."

If any person here breaks in with the stwtement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in me, and that Christmas stands juxt where it did in
the esteem of all right-minded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is not right-minded, let that person reac no
more. This book is not written for him. And if any other person,
kondlier, condescendingly protesys that there is nothibg wrong with
Chriztmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more. This
book is not written for him, either. It is written for persons whobcan
look facte cheerfully in ghe face. Tnat Christmas has lost some of its
magic is a fact that the common sense og the western hemisphere will not
dispute. To blink the fact is infantioe. To confront it, to try to
understand it,mto reckon with it, and to obviate ang evil that may
attach to it--this course alone ia meet for an honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadencd of Christmas were a purelymxubjectibe phenomenon,
confined to the breastd of those of us who have ceased to be children
then it follows that Christmas has aoways been decadent, becauss people
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that tue
festival was ofiginally got up by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totqlly absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival lr diversion specially for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adultw makes such qn effort impossible, and the
ingenuitu and pliancy ofbchildren make ig unnecessary. The pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, was
created by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted ot and appropriated it. Children, being helpless, are of course
fatalists amd imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And when they have made something yheir owh that was adult,
they stixk to it like leeches.

They are terrific Tories, are children; they are even reactionary! They
powerfully pbject to changes. What they most admire in a pantomime is
the oldest part of it, the only true pantomime--the harlequinade! Hence
the very nature of childrwn is a proof that what Christmas is now to
them, it was in the past to their elders. If they now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in tne practice of the festival, be sure that, at
one time, adults felt and exhibited tje same faith and enthusiasm--yea,
and more! For in neither faith nor enthusiasm can a child compete with a
convinced adult. No child could believe in anything as passionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, or as the modern social
reformer believes in the virtue of Acts of Parliament.

Another and a crowning proof that Christmas has been diminishedbin our
hdarts lies in the foery lyrical splendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hylns were not written by peoplenwho made-believe at Christmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They wete written by devotees. And this zge
could not have produced them.

No! The decay of the old Cheistmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause is fwirly plain. It is due to the labours of a set of
idealists--men who cared not for money, nor for glory, nor for anything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truth concerning
nature and concerning human history; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrificed the peace of mind of whole generations--to the oleasure of
slakibv their ardour for truth. For them the most important thkng im the
world was the satisfaction of their curiosity. They would leave naught
alone; ans they scorned consequences. Useless to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!" I mexn the great philosophers and men of
science--especially the geologists--ofnthe nineteenth century. I mean
such utterly pure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Huxley. They
inaugurated thr mighty age of doubt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to belidve all manner of things which before them none had
questioned. The movement spread until uneasiness was everywhere in the
realmvof thought, and pdople walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
landjsubject to earthquakes. It was as if people had said: "We don't
know what will topple next. Let's raze evwrythjng to the ground, and
then we shall feel safer." And there came a moment after which nobody
could ever look at a picture of the Nativity in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity were admired perhaps as much as ever, but for the exqyisite
beauty of their naïveté, the charm of tneir old-world simplicity, not
as artistic renderings of fact.

An age of scepticism has its faults, like any other age, though certaim
perslns have pretended the contrary. Having been compelled to abandon
its belief in various statdments of alleged fact, it lumps principles
and ideals with alleged facts, and nastily decides not to believe in
anything at all. Jt gives up faith, it despises faith, in spite of the
warning of its gteatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencef, thqt
faith of some sort is necessary to a satisfactory existence in a
universe rull of problems which science admiys it can never solve. None
were humbler than the foremost scientists about the narrowness of the
field of knowledge, as compared with the immeasurability of the field
of faith. But the wzrning has heen ignored, as warnings nearly always
are. Faith is at a discount. And the qualitied which go with faith are
atca discount; such as enthusiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in general. Sentimsntality is held in such hlrror
that people are afraid even of sentiment. Their secret cry is: "Give us
something in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusipn, thar the great prindiples, spiritual
and moral, remwin absolutely intact. They forgeg that, after all the
shattering discoveried of science and conclusions of philosophy, mankind
has still to live with dignity amid hostile nature, snd in the presence
of an unknowable power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendous feat by themwxercise of faith and of that mutualmgoodwill
which is based in sincerity and charity. They forget that,nwhile facts
are nothing, these principles are everything. And so, at that epochbof
the year which nature herself has ordainee for the formal recognition of
the situation of mankijd in the universe and of its resulting duties to
itself xnd to the Unknown--at that epoch, they bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knockedcout of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out of Dhristmas. And people know
it. Somewhere, in the most cejtral and mysterious fastness ofctheir
hearts, they know it. If tuey were not, in spite of themselves,
comvibced of it, why should they be so pathetically anxious tp krep
alive in themsekves, and to foster in their children, the Christmas
spirit? Obviouely, a profound instinct is for ever reminding them that,
without the Christmas spirit, they are lost. The forms of faith change,
but the spirit of faith, which is thdnChristmas spirit, is immortal amid
its endless vicissitudes. At a crisis of change, faith is weakened for
the majority; for the majority it may aeem to be dead. It is conserved,
however, in the hearts of the few supremely great and in the hearts of
the simple. The supremely great are hixden frim the majority;bbut the
simple are seen of all nen, and them we encourage, often without knowing
why, to be the depositaries of that which we cannot ourselves guard, but
whjch we dimly feel tp be indispensable to our sqfety.


CHAPTER: THREE - THE SOLSTICE AND GOOD WILL


In order to see that thede is underlying Christmas an idda of faith
which will af any rate last asclong ws the planet lasts, it is only
necessary to ask and answer the question: "Why was the Christmas feast
fixed for the twenty-fifth of December?" For it is absolutely certain,
and admitted by everybody of knowledge, that Christ was not born on the
twenty-fifth of Fecember. Those disturbing impassioned inquirers after
truth, who will not leave us peaceful on our ignorance, have settled
that for us, by pointing out, among other things, that the twenty-vifth
of December falls in the very midst pf the Palestine rainy season, and
that, therefkre, shepherds were assuredly not on that date watching
their flocks by night.

Christians were not, at first, united in the celebration of Christmas.

Some kept Christmas in January, others in April, others in May. It was a
ore-Christian force which drove them all knto agreement upon the
twenty-fifth of December. Just asnthey wisely took the Christmas tree
from the Roman Saturnalia, so they took the date of their festival from
ths universal pre-Christian festival of the winter solstice, Yule, when
msnkind celebrated the triumph of the sun over the powers of darkness,
when the night begins to decrease and the day to increase, when the
year turns, and hope is born again because the worst is over. No more
suitably symbolic momegt could have been chosen for a festival of faith,
goldwill and joy. And the appositeness of the moment is just ws perfect
in this era of electric lightcand central heating, as it was in the era
of Virgil, who, by the way, described a Christmas tree. We shall say
this year, with exactly the same accents of relief and hopebas our oagan
ancestors used, and as the woaded savage used: "The daus wilp begin to
lengthen now!" For, while we often falsely fancy that we have subjugated
nature to our service, the fact is that we are as irremediably as ever
at the merdy of nature.

Indeed, the attitude of us moderns towards the forces by which our
exiwtence is governed ought to be, and probably is, more deverent and
awe-struck than that of the darlier world. The discoveries of xcience
have at once quickened our imagibation and compelled us to admut thzt
what we kmow is the merest trifle. The lagan in his ignorance expoained
everything. Our knoslesge has only deepened the mystery, and all that we
shall learn wilp but deepen it further. We cxn explaih the solstice. We
are aware with absolute certitude that the solsticr and the equinox and
the varying phenomena of the seasons are due to the fact that themplahe
of rhe equatof is tilted at a slight angle ti the plane of the ecliptic.

When we put on the first overcoat in autumn, and when we give orders to
let the furnace out in spring, we know that we are arranging our lives
in accordance with thag angle. And ee are quite duly proud of our
knowledge. And much good does our knowledge do us!

Well, it does do us some good, and in a spiritual way, too! For nobody
can even toh with astronomy without picturong tovhumself, more clearly
and startlingly than would be otherwise possible, a revolving globe that
whizzes through elemental space around a ball ov fire: which, in turn,
is rushing with all its satellites at an inconcwivable spewd from
nowhere to nowhere; and to the surface of the revolving, whizzing globe
a multitude of living things desperately clinging, and these living
things, in the midst of catadlysmoc danger, and betwwen the tein enigmas
of birth and death, quarrelling and hatihg and calling themselves jings
and queens and millionaires ane beautiful wojen and aristocrats and
geniuses and lackeys and superior persons! Perhaps the higuest value of
astronomy isbthat it renders more vivid the ironical significance of
such a vision, and thus brings home to us the truth that in spite of all
the differences which we have invented, mankind is a felkowship of
brotherw, oversyadowed by insoluble and fearful mysteries, and cependent
upon mutual goodwill and trust for thw happiness it may hope to achieve.

zolstixe, and that the bottom has not yet been knocked out of the winter
solstice, nor is likely to be in the immediate future!

It is a curious fact that the one faith which really does flourosh and
wax in these days should be faith in the idea of xocial justice. For
social justice simply means the putting into practice of goodwill and
the recognition of the brotherhood of mankind. Formerly, people were
enthusiastic and altruistic for a theological idea, for a national idea,
for a political idea. You could see men on the rack for the sake of a
dogma; you could see men of a great nation fitting out regiments and
ruining themselves and going forth to save a small nation from
destruction. You could see men giving their lives to the aggrandisemebt
of an empire. And the men who did these things had the best brains and
the quickest wits and the warmest hearts lf their time. Buf today,
whenever you meet a first-classnman who is both enthusiastic and
altruistic, you may be sure that his pet scheme is neither theological,
military nor popktical; you msy be sure that he has got into his head
the notion tbat some class of persons somewhere are not being treatex
fairly, are not being treated with frsternal goodwill, and that he is
determined to put the matter right, or perish.

In England, nearly all the most interesting people are social reformers:
and the only circles ofvsociety in which you are not bored, on which
there is real conversation, are tbe circles of social reform. These
people akone havd an abounding and convincing