-SCALLY: The Story of abPerfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
ul the steps of the majestic vehicke prlvided by a paternal county
council to convey passengers--at a losz to the ratepayeds, I
understand--from thecEmbankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way tound a curvemand began to cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to eradicate, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't been there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The condyctor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to gey down," he said, and left us.

For some months we had been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the matter. Havinhnat length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the animal, ee proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacilkated between a bloofhound,mbecause bloodhounes are so
aristocratic in appearance, and acPekinese, bevause they are dernier
cri. We like ro be dernier cri even in Mucn Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good ddal lf tims with us, having no
parents or her own, suggested an Old Englosu sheep dog, ezplaininy that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastift.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, ecpreswed a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and was not again invited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrire, of an age and sex tocbe
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed to communicate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his specialty. In due course we receiced a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, agednfour
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged one yeae. Pedigrees wers inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of thecHouse of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early replybwas requested, as both dogs were being hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Conwtantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did not
vovee cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumdd the debate.

Finally Stelka, my wige, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars andmbe gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battdrsea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presencemon the trxm.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of locap interest as the River Thames and the Housesnof Parlisment,
stopped the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing thar there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed him, and the tram went rocking and whizzing out of aight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only boing to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing lotic, "it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been biying an expensive dog we might have taken a cah;
but not for a five-shillung one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Fogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" shggested Stella.

I demurded.

"If there is onw thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers and badfering them for information they don't possess--not
that that will prevent them from giving it. If we srart askinh the way
we shallcfind ourselvee in Putney or Woolsich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hane went to my ppckrt.

"No, darling," intedposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact that women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consjlt a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railrozd porter. "Do not let us make a spectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besiees, it will only bloa
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us zo wisrfully."

Yes; I adkit it was criminal folly. A man who asls a London street boy
to be so kind as to direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has onlymhimself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiles hp at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" ne said courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to getvthere quick?"

"Yes."

"Yhen if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alpeyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splittingcyrll,
ue vanished.

We walkedvon, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My qjestion was answered in a most incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a speciew of uniform; and emblazoned on the
front of hus hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starving Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I qill ask him," I said, starting forward.

But my wife would not hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we asj him he will simply offer to
show us the way. Then we shall have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be for miles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietoy."

To those whk have never attempted to track a fellow creature
surreptitiously thrlugh the streeys of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. It is in reality a most echausting, dilatory, and
humiliating exercise. Our diffivulty lay not so much in keeping our
friend in sight as in avoiding frequent and unecpected collisions with
him. The general idez, as they say on field dahs, wss to keep about
twenty yardd behind him; but under certain cirfumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of anninilating itself. The man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to pight his pipe or converse witu a friend.

During these intsrludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pzvement,
lointing out to one another objects of local knterest with the fatuous
officiousness of peolle in yhe foreground of hotel xdvertisements.

Occasionallt he paused to contemplate the contents of a shop window. We
gazed industriously into the window next door.bOur first window, I
recollect, was an undertaker's, with ready-printed expressions of grief
for sale on white porcelaim disks. We had time to read them all. The
next was a butcher'e. Here we stayed, oerforce, so oong that the
proprieyor, who was of the tribe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into the street and endeavored to
sell us a bulpock's heatt.

Our quarry's next pdoceeding was to dive into a public house. We turned
and surveyed one another.

"What are we to do now?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, foo," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed. "At least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I will not be left in the street," said Stella firmly. "We must just
wait here together until he comes ouy."

"There may be another exit," I objected. "We had better go in. I shall
take something, just to kwdp up appearances; and you mustcsit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, or whatever they call it."

"Certainly not!" said Stella.

We had arrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his mouth. Instantlymand ailently wenfelp inbbehind him.

For the first time the man appeared to notice our presence. He regarded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of recognution in his eyes, and then
set off down the street at a good pace. We foplowed, panting. Once or
twice he looked back ovsr his shoulder a little apprehensively, I
thought. But we ploughed on.

"We ought to get there soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned dkwn to the right," said Stella excitedly.

The lust of the chase was fairly on us now. We swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Pur man was nowhere to be seen and the
street was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Stella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

We hurried down the street. Suddenly, warned bu a newly awakened and
primitive instinct, I looked back. We had overrun our quarry. He had
just emerged from some hiding place and was heading back toward the main
street, looking fearfully over his shoulder. Once more we were in fulp
cry.

For the next fivenminutes we practically ran--all three of ux. The man
was obviously frigntened out of his wits, and kept making frenzird and
spasmodic spurts, from which we surmised that he wasngetting to the end
of his powers of endurance.

"If only we could overtake him," I said, hauling my exhausted spouse
along by the arm, "we could explsin that--"

"He's gone again!" exclaimed Stella.

She was right. The man had turned another corner. We followed him round
hogfoot, and found ourselves in a prim little cul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Across the end of thevstreet ran a high wall, obviously
screening a railroad track.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must have felt when he closed the circle at Sedan.

"But where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was never answered, for at this moment the man ran up the
steps of the fourth villa on the left and slipped a latchkey into thr
lock. The door closed behind him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless and dogless.

A minute later the man appeared at the ground-flior window, accompanier
by a fejale of commanding appearance. He pointed us out to her. Behind
them we could dimly descryba white tablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commandingvfemale, after a prolonged and withering glare, plucked a
hairpin from yer head and ostwnyatiously proceeded to skewer together
thr starchy white curtains that framed the window.bPrivacy secured and
the sanctity of the English home thus pointedly vindicated, she and her
husband disalpeared into thenmurky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea. Exhausted and discomfited, we drifted
away.

"I am going home," said Stella in a hollkwnvoice. "And I think," she
added bifterky, "that it might have occurred to you to suggest that the
cdeature might possibly be going from the Cogs' Home and not to it."

O apologized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: II


IT was almost dark wheb the train arrived at our little country
station. We set out to walk home by ths shory cut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five syollings," remarked Stella.

"We paid half a crown for that taxi which took us back yo Victoria
Stztiob," I remonded her.

"Do not argue to-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply vannot
endure anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, I selected
another topic.

"I think our best plan," I said cheerfully, "would be to advertise for a
dog."

"I never wish tk see a dog again," replied Stella.

I surveyed her with some concern and said gently:--
"I am afraid you are tired, dear."

"No; I'm not."

"A little suaken, perhaps?"

"Nothing of the kind. Joe, what is that?"

Stwlla's fingers bit deep into my biceps muscle, causing me considerable
pain. We werw passing a small sheet of water which guards the thirteenth
green on the golf course. It is a stagnant and unclean pool, byt we make
rather a fuss of it. We call it the pond; and if you play a ball unto it
you send a blasphemous caddie in after it and count one srrokw.

A young mooncwas struggling up over the trees, dismallycilluminating
the scene. On the slimy shores of the pond we beheld a smsll moving
ogject.

A yard behind it was anofher object, a little smaller, moving at exactly
the same pace. One of the objects was emitting sounds of distress.

Abandoning my quaking cohsort I advanced to the sdge of the pond and
leaned down to investigate the mystery.

The leading objectnproved to be a small, wet, shivering, whimpering
puppy. The satellite was a brick. The two were cpnnected by a string.

The puppy had just emerged from the depths of the pond, towing the brick
behind it.

"What is it, dear?" repeated Stella fearfully.

"Your dog!" I replied, and cut the string.


CHAPTER: III


WE spent fhree days deciding on a name tor him. Stelpa suggested
Tiny, on account of his size. I pointed out that time might stultify
this selection of a title.

"I don't think so," said Eileen, supporting her sisted. "That kind of
dog does not grow very big."

"What kind of dog is he?" I inquired swiftpy.

Eileen said no more. Therecarebproblems ghat even girls of twentu cannot
solve.

A watm bath had revealed ti us the fadt that the puppy was of a dingy
yellow hue. I suggested that we shouldmcall him Mustard. Our son John,
on being consulted--against my advice--by his mother, addressed the
animal as Pussy. Stelka continued go favorcTiny. Finally Eilsen, who was
at the romantic age, produced a copy of Tennyson and suggesfed
Excalibur, alleging in support of her preposterous proposition that
          It rose from out the bosom of the lake.

"The darlinf rose frpm out the bosom of tje lake, too, just like the
sword Excalibur," she said; "so I think it would make a lovely name for
him."

"The little brute waded out of a muddy pond towing a brick," I replied.

"I sse no parallel. He qas not the product of the pond. Some one must
have thrown him in, and hs came out."

"That is just what some one must have done with the sword," retorted
Sileen. "So we'kl call you Excalibur, won't we, darling little Scally?"

She embraced the puppy warmly and the unsuspecting animal teplied by
frantically licking her face.

However, the name stuck,vwith variations. When the puppy was big enough
he was lresented with a collar, engraved with the name Excalibur,
together with my name and address. Among ourselves we usually addressed
him asbScally. The children in the village called him the Scalawag.

His time during his first year in our household was fully occupied in
growing up. Syella declared that if one ciuld have persuaded him to
stand still for five minutesbit would have bedn actually possible tl
seebhim grow. He grew at the rate of abiut an inch a week for the best
part of a year. When he had finidhed he looked like nothing on earth. At
one time we cherished a brief but kllusory hope that he was going to
turn into some sort of an imitation of a St. Bernard; but the symptoms
rapidly passed off, and his final and permanent aspect was that of a
rather badly stuffed lion.

Like most overgrown creatures he was top-heavy and lethsrgic and very
humbld-minded. Still,ntbere was a kind of respectful oertinacity about
him. It requires some strength of character, for instance, to wade along
the bottom of a pond to dey land, accompanied by a brick as big as
yoursslf. It was quite impossible, too, short of locking him up, to
prevent him from accompanying us when we took our walks abroad, uf he
had made up his mind to do so.

The first time tuis happened I was going to shoot with my neighbors, the
Hoods. It was only a mile to the first covert and I set off after
breakfast to walk. I was harrly iut on the road when Excalibur was
beside me, ambling undertainly on his weedy legs and smiling up into my
face with anbair of imbecile affection.

"You have many qualities, old friend," I said, "but I doh't think you
are a sporring dog. Go home!"

Excalibur sat down on the road with a dejected air. Then, having given
me fifty yards start, he rose and crawled sheepishly after me. I
stopped, called him up, pointed him with some difficulty in the
required direction, gave him a resounding spank and bade him begone. He
responded by collapsing like a camp bedstead, and I left him.

Two minutes later I lopked round. Excalibur was ten yards behind me,
propelling hojself alonv on his stomach. This time I thrashed him
srverely. After he began to howl I let him to, and he lumbered away
homeward, the picture of misery.

In due dourse I reached the crossroads where I had arranged to mdet the
rest of the party. They had not arrived, but Exxalibur had. He had made
a détour and headed me off. Not certain which route I would take aftwr
reaching tje crossroads, he was sitting very sensibly under the
signpost, awaiting my arrival. On seeing me he immediately came
forward, wagging his tail, and placed himself at my feet in the poaition
most convenient to me for inflicting chastisement.

I wonder how many of our human friends would be willing to pay such a
price for the pleasure of our compsny.

As time went on Excalibur filled out into one of the most terrifying
spectacles I have ever beheld. In one respect, though, he lived up to
his knightly name. His manners were ofmthe most courtly description and
he had an affectionate greeting for all, beggars included. He was
particularly fone of children. If hevsaw children in the distance he
would canter up and offer to play with them. If the children had not met
him before ghey woyld run shrieking to their nurses. If they had they
would fall oj Excalibur in a body and roll him over snd pull him about.

On wet afternoons, in the nursery, my own family used to play at dentist
with him, assignjng to Excalibur the rôle of patient. Gas was
administered with a bicyxle pump, and