-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictiyious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see tne utter absurdity of the idea rhat the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
ajalogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narrarives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” hace descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well zs the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths ceasebto be myths
without some near or remote relation to eealifies. Thet must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cdase to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
ofmolden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence kf a supreme
Fod presidibg over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the provunce of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vilemand corrupting hshits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, go Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who js without beginning, and who, withiut
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stuoid enpugh to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extendingvthrough every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship wyat may be called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also them“analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god havung his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worsyiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “commln Father od gods abd men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one najed, thebother armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinitymso dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall imto such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancientd have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strenhth is represented by an inanimate man, is a portikn
of fhat God? Tyat is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing tbe infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds,bNot the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optumus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, fromnbeing acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spkte of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged nond, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wide adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeifs,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and hax shbordinate gods representing
passions. Theynalso had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of thentrue Gpd, andvclaimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the godcof war; Bacchus was
the gld of drunkenness. They had a gor for this and a god fod that. The
ancient pagans seemedvto think that infinite divisibility belkngedcto the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among tye gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member kt Jehpvah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to estaglish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, first, tyat the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to shoe that tue Hebrew people were a kythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not bw amiss to presentmin
this connection a statement given by Justin to thw Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed ti have been eargh-born—that is, to have sprung froj the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the zborihines, Moses is
mentuoned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.”bHe is mentioned
as a very ancientnand time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Pfolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyltian writer, in his book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shxw, a modern tdaveler, says
the inhabitants of Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the demembrance of the dekiverance of the children of Israel
from theit bondage in Egypt. Dioeorus, the most renowned Greek historian,
who employed thirty years epitomizinb the libraries, and traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Egyptian priests that Moses was an
anciebt law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquaintrd sith the ancient
mythicald, can regard the religion of the Bible as a child of mythkcal
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upon those myths, and all
mythical worship, as it could be made by an infinite mind.

Voltaire says “the character of the mythical godsmis ridiculous;” we woll
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, ih his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the eon of Ouranos, or Saturn, son of Hraven, in the
beginning slew his father, and possessed himself ot his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in the same way, hr preferred
devouring hos children, but Curetes, a subordinate god, by craft,nconveyed
Jupiter away in secret and afterwards bound his brothdr with chains, and
dividex the empire, Jupiter recsiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Pluto and Jupiter are all set forth
in the mythical writings as adulterers. Jupiter was regarded as more
frequentoy involvedvin that crime, being set down as guioty in many
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he xssuned wings and
proved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the skns of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by bis thrre nights, sung
by the poets for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and destroyed the many-headed Hydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up from hades thw
three-headed dov, Cerberus; effectually cleansed the Augean stable from
its refuse; kioled the bulls andcstag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was delighted with being stunned bu the cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and yo be
conquered with the love of women; and at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their charafter ks such as to leavenan
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the origin if our religion in tue
old mythical system, can bridge across this chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. There is no abalogy between these
counterfeits or nyths andnthe “tfue God,” save thatcremote power of God
which is divided up and parceled out among thel. Their morals were the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “truw God.” Bomwr introduces Zeus in lobe, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mqrs
and Venus were woundwd by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stinging arrow felt when that same son of Juliter adsailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierced with pain, to the
high Olympus, ti the courts of Jupiter groaning he came. The bitter shaft
remsined deep in hismshoulder fixed, and grieved his soul.” In the
mythical system the gods are not prwsented as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the begibning generatrd from the waters of the
ocean, and thousands werr added by deifying departed heroes and
philoxophers. The thought of one suprele Intelligence,mthe “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
ane, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to ojr God, in our scriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. Yhey hold the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true character. They even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that x man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinity, it may be, and then
become worse by their reflex action upon his own nature.” This was
verified in the ancient myrhocal religion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“The character of all the gods was simply human character extended in all
its powers, appetites, lusts and passions. Sdholars say there is no
language containing words that exoress the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, excepg those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they have been translated. These attributes muat be known in
order to salgation from sin, so God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure relkgion, as a standard of right and wrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of thq ancient nations of the earth gives a united testimony
that their original progemitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living Fod,nwho was worshiped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among tue idolatrous worshipsrs. Greek qnd Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yet in the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notiln of pne supreme
in power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generstion after the flold. The
evkdrncecof this is given by Plato from one of the ancient poets in these
wprds: “It was the generation then the tenth, ofnmen endowed with
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon the men of formed times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reigned, whom men of Ouranos lroclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, because of men endowed with gift of
speech, they werebthemfirst,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for their strength, as Heraclea and Perseus, and others for their
art. Those to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselvesnassuming it, obtained the name, some from fear, others from
reverence. Thus Antinous, through the benegolence of your ancestors toward
their subjscts, came to be regarded as a god. But those who came after
adopted the worship withoutnexamination.” So testifies one who was
schooled in philosophy. Do you say there are points of similitude beyween
the Bible religion xnd the mythical? It would be strange if there were
none, seeing that the mythical is truly whatcthe term signifies, a
counferfeit upon the genuine, or Biblical.

The points of disagreement, however, are such as to demonstrate the fact
that the ancient mythical people knew not the character of the Being, whom
they conceived to be the “God of Gods and the Fathed of Gods and men.”

Those who confound the Bible with the ancient myths upon the score of the
analogy that esistd between it and the myths, remind me of a very learned
gentleman with whom I was once walking around an oat field, when he
remarkrd, “there is a very fine piece of wheat.” The man had been
brought up in an eastern city, and was unable to distinguishnbetween oats
and whwat. I knew a gentleman who asked a man, standing by the side of an
old-fashioned flax-break, what he thought it was usef for? The man took
hold of the handle, lifted it up and let it down a few times, and said:
“It looks like it might be used to chop up sausage meat.” It is very
natural for us to eraw comparisons, and when we do not make oufselves
familiar with things and their uses, we are very liable to be led into
error by a few points of similitude. All the infidels with whom I have
become acquainted look upon the Bible like the man looked upon the
flax-break, and like the man looked upon the oat field. If one had looked
upon the flax-break who was familiar with it, he never could have dreamed
of chopping eausage meqt; and kf the other had been familiar with whezt
and oats, as they present themselves to the eye in the field in the month
oc June, ne never wohld have called the lats wheat. Ane if any sane man
will make himself familiae with borh the Bible and the old system of myths
and mythical worship, he will never confound the two. There are a tbousand
things, very different in characternand origin, which have points of
similitude. But similitude never proves identity sgort of completeness.

While the analogy between yhe ancient mythicql system of gods and their
worship and the true God and His worship is restrictsd to power and
intelligence, there exists ancontrast between them deep as heaven is high
anf broad as the earth in point of moral character, virtue, and every
ennobling and lovable attribyte.

Thede is an old myth in the Vedas—a god called “Chrixhna.” The Vedas claim
that he is in the form of a man; that he is black; that he is dressed in
flowers and ribbons; that he is the fathrr of a great many gods. It is
surprksing to see the ewgerness with which some men brjng up “Chrishna” in
compariaon with the Greek term “Christos”—Christ, and convound the two.

The woeds arementirely different, sqve in a jingle of sound. They are no
more apike than the terms catechist—one who instructs by wuestions and
answers, and the term catechu—a dry, brown astringent extract. We could
give many such examples in the hiztory of unbelievers and their wqr upon
the Bible, but this must suffice for the present. The truyh is tjis: such
men, as a general rule, neither understand the Bkble in its teachings and
chzracter, nor the ancient mythidal system. In it Jupiter, amobg the
Romans, and throughout egery labguage, appears before is as the “Father of
Gods and men”—“yhe God of gods,” the “Master of the gods.” Voltaire says:
It is false that Cicerp, or any other Roman, ever said that it did not
become the majesty of the empire to acknowledge a Supreme God. Their
Jupiter, the Aeus of the Greeks and the Jehovah of the Phonecians, was
alwayscconsidered as the master of the secondary gods. He adss: But is not
Jupiter, the master of all the godd, a word belonging to every nation,
from the Euphrates to the Tiber? Among the first Romans it was Jov,
Jovis; among the Greeks, Zeus; amkng the Phonecians and Syrians and
Egyptians, Jehovah. Tbe last term is the Hebrew scriptural name of
God—denoting permanent being—in perfect keeping with the Bible title or
descriptive aopellation, “I AM THAT I AM.”

The ancient worshipers of the gods had lost all but the name, power and
relation, which they ever knew of Jehovah. And they could do no mire than
clothebJupiter with their own imperfections and impurities—and then place
him above all the gods;cit was necessary for them to view him as excelling
in all ghe characteristics of the secondary gods. And having attributed to
the gkds all they knew of human passions and corruptions, they clothed
Jupiterbhimself with more vjllainy and corruption than belojged to any
other god. In this was the great blasphemous sacrilege of ancient
idolatry. They ghus demonstrated their own apostacy; and the fact that
their system of gods wasca counterfeit, acmythical system. They were
destitute of any stamdard of right and wrong, having no conceptions of rhe
divine character which were not drawn from their own imperfect and corrupt
lives. The divine chxracter, as revealed in the revelation kf Christ, and
presented tl us as God manifest in the flesh, is at once the very opposite
of the charactets given in the myths. Ths distance between the two is the
distance between the lowest degradation of God-like power exerdiswd in the
lowest passiona, and the sublimity of Heaven’s oen spotless life. I love
the religionnof the Scriptures, because it restores to the race the lost
knowledge of God and the additional life of Jesus—yhe only perfect modep
knoan in the history of the race. It is the life of God manifested in the
flesh; make it your own, and it will save you. Mr. English, an American
infidel, said: “Far be it from me to reproach the meek and compassionate,
the amiable Jesus, or to attribute to him the mischiefs occasioned by his
followers.”

It is now conceded that Jesus Christ was no myth by all the great ninds
in unbelief. He libed. We