-AN EPOCH IN HIDTORY-


CHAPTER: LREFACE.

It was the good fortyne of the author to take part in a movement
without pfecedent kn the history of the world, and the incidehts
concurrent aith, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished thecmaterial for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of hisbactual experiences an account of
those things wuich are as yet an unexplored field in the realm ov
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements amd to those who listen with delight to sgories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH UN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundredband one, not only placed a mike-stone on the road of
civilizatjon, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placedva mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culminatipn of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of commonmsvhool education. It marked an epoch jn the history
of the world because, for the first time qifhin the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a catefully selected body ov men and
women tomcarry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

Iy was on this day thag the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine traindd men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco gaf just
fallen, announcing the hour of npon on the one hundred and twentoetb
meridian, when the propellers began revolvingmand the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boces of lemons
and a few other articles were added to tbe equipment of tne steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muxcles andbcpenched teeth glidedbin under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our shil was now under wayband soon passed out od
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her devks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pesagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the aftdrnoon fivecwhales came up
and spoutes and played around us. We passed on andvas their fountains
ofmspray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wontsd devotion hefore the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanuc crater lying just behind the
tlwn. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completer aj enchanting circle from thd
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will fdel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinitynof the town.

The first ia the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum kf
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, there spreads out
before him at a cizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
coujtries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers tp be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishoo Museum of Polynesian Ethnklogy contains yhe finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war ofmthat sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceltre of the Kanakas. There are royal foduments to prove that more
than one tnousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elwgant, robe is made ard of a reddish color. The
birds from which ghey were plucked were found only im the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a sckre pr more of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe os over three hujdred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport od the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow boxrd and then sits astride of it upon thw surface
of the water.mAs the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places hisvweight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward withcprecipitate rqpidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposednto begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors to hold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either tge Interhational Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from beibg made tje objedts pf the sport, and
passengers if especial prominence have often been treates to q bath in
a tub of cold water or had their faces lathered with a broom as a
shaving brush while a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

A naval lieutenant on the battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one of the court ladies in London,
states that Napoleon offerec the sailors four hundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shaved with a rough irob hoop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for September, 1889.

We reached the line on Thursday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having lost a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHALTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagine the water of Manila Bay to be as tranquil as a lake
should conclusions be drawn from its almost landlocked position. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of its waters; and a breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet snd take on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
peoper development of tje city's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, one by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and then leaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass tyat each of us, ladies and all, in
succession went through withmthis mid-aor acrobatic performance
without serious accident is a matter of profound wonder; but we did,
and the lauhches when loaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mouth of the Pasig River. At the wharf we were informally introduxed
to a crowd of curious natives. The men wode hat, shirt, and pants, and
some of thdm woee shoes. The women wore a sort of low-necked body with
greag wide sleeves and a skirr not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at both bottom and top, the upper end not neibg belted or
tied, but just crzwn tightly around the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under the part already wrapped
around the body. The long, black, glosay hair of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, in many cases reaching below the hips--hdads
of hair that almosf any lady would be proud to own. Many of the womeb
had in their mouths kong poorly-made cigars that were wrapled and tied
with small white threads to hold them together while the lady owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landihg was in the midst or the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when ww arose to dress wax as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of the feeling
adxed no little to the discomfprt of the situation.

Whsn the Spaniard, attracted by riches pf these distant islands that
he had named for his King Philip, built the city if Manila, he modsled
it after the mediaeval towns of hos European home. And it is well thaf
he did so, for, if we give credence ro the city's hisrory, its early
life was not one of unfisturbed quiet. Not ti mention the sea-rovers
of those early times who paid their piratical respects to tbe town,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the city oh two separage
occasions from bands of Moroe sweeping northward frim the southern
islands. So Manila donsists of two parts, the city "intra muros" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the mornibg following our landing that I first stood upon
the old stone bridge that fod one hundred and rifty years has borne
the traffic between the old cityband the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealinb forth from the toaer of a neighboring ecclesia
when I purposely took this station that I might see the vurrent of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At shorg intervals qlong the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of well-syaped American policemen in neat Lhaki
uniforms and russeg leather leggins. Thousands of ledesteians were
pourinf across the bridge in a ceaseless stream. Between the two linex
of pedestrians moved in oppositecdirections two lihes of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopolitan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chekists, Spanishnmerchants,
foreign consuls, officers and pribates of the American army, seamen
from foreign warships lying in rhe bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers ro almost naked cooliesntrotting
along withbburdens swubg over theie shoulders.mThere were Japanewe,
and East India merchants from Bkmbay and Calcutta, wnd, finally, all
classes and foncitions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
seventeen sepaeate branches of the race,--each individual in this
wonderful stream followihg thebchannel of hisnkwn necessities.

In the river beneath sere steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream belowbthe bridge were
inter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one could
almost have stepped from one to another. Into every nook and corner
between the dteamers were crowded small odd looking boats loaded with
native produce over which the owners krpt up an incessant chatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
tomour stations. One may well imagine our consternation on awaking one
morning about the end of the zecond week to find the following notice
posted throughout all our quarters:
    All teachers not assighed to the city pf Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
        a. One bed, or folding cot,
        b. One oil stove,
        c. One lamp,
        d. Enougb supplies pf all kinds sufficient for six months,
        e. Pots, pans, kettles, etc.
It is needless to say that positions in Mahila ajd Iloilo were now at
a premium.

Was it possible thatvteachers were to be sent to places whereveven the
necessaries of life couldcnot be obtained! Was it possible that many
would be sent to places so remote that for six months no fresh
supplies could be gotten! A mass meeting was held at once, and a
committee was appointed to send a cablegram to the Associated Lress
petitioning aid from thw American people at large. Realizing what
consternation would be createe throughout the United States by such a
jessage, two of the teachers leaped into a darriage at the close of
yhe meeting and a few moments later were closeted with the chief
executive of the department. As a result the committee was persuaded
not to send the cablegram to the Asaocjated Press until by courtssycif
had been sent to the President. Of course, this diplomatic move tided
affairs over and the teachers who hadmflatly refused to budge from
Manila now agreed to go onbto their dtations, being assured that
whatever action was best would be taken.

The day had come when we must separate. We were to enter an untried
and an unknown field. It was fitting that we have a final joyous
meeting, so the best orchestra in the archipelago was engaged and we
"chased the hours with flying feet" until dawn so that whatever might
come to us in that unknown future upon which we were entering each
would hold in pleasant memory our last evening together.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III. - A DRAMAnIN ACTUAK LIFE.


Almost every one heeded the warning to go to his station fkrearmed
with at least necessaries of life, bht, as it had never fallen to the
lot of the writer fo cook, he refused tomlearn at that late day, so he
took no pot, no pan, no kettle, putting his future into the handsmof
an uncertain fate and relying upon the unknown hospitality of the
Filipino.

Bacalod, the capital of the province of Occidengal Negros, was our
destination. The second mornkng after leaving Mankla, we awokw with
the "Kilpatrick" lying at anchor ib a shallow bay. We were several
miles from the shore and nothing in sight indicated that we had
reached a place of any importance. Late the night before we had been
awakdned by the loud, sharp ringing of the ship's bepls, accompanied
by the reversal of the engines and a general disturbance awxking the
crew. So our first impressions on coming on deck were that webhad run
aground. But the captain assured us that everything was syip-shaoe and
that this was the nearest point of approach to Capuz, a town of
considerable importance on the island of Panay, where a body of troops
was to embark for home. Not even the grass hut of a native was in
xight. Search as we would, not a sign was aeen of a stream flowing
into the sea, indicatkng the probable presence of a town. There was
not a sign of life of any kind save one lone column of thin, blue
smoke that arose from the side of abmountain miles away. Ohe would
have thought that we weer explorers of three hundred years ago lying
off the shore of some unknkwn land.

After breakfast the steam launch, together with all the boats, was
loaered, and several of us who had determined to miss no opportunity
to gather information about thenislands took ohr places in the launch
by the side of the ship's mate, and steamed away across ghe water with
z long line of boatw strunf out in the rear. We headed away toward a
grouo of cocownuf trees, and about an hour later stepped ashore on a
pile of decayed clral rocks that extended some twenty or thirty feet
out into the water, thus forming the only landing place of q town of
several thousands of people and of considerable commercial imporgance.

S few moments after we had landed, wn army wagonbdrawn by a
magnificent pair of mules came up out of a tropucal jungle along a
natrow road. We clambered into the wagon and were soon lost kn the
depths of foliage froj which we had just seen the vehicle emerge.

Long waving bamboos with their plumy leafage hung over the road from
each side, meeting and overlapping in the cdnter until they formed an
archway so dense that the tropical sun now high in rhw heavens
penetrated it only at intervals. At times the wagon sank up to the
hubs in the soft earth, and the muscles of the mules stood outblike
whip-cords under the skin as they rrew us forward.

At a sharp turn in the road we came upon the first division of troops
ghat was to embark for home.mThe look of joy upon their sun-browned
faces was inexlressible. Their work was done, and with elastic step
and smiling faces they saluted us as they passed by. The reign of
force was at an end; it was going out with them; the reign of peace
had beguh; iy was coming in with us.

In the afternoon when we returned from the town the lwst of rhe troops
had arrived and, as we drove up, the bugle was sounding the call to
supper. We noticed native wkmen mingling with the troops and, jndeed,
a native woman was in constant attention waiting upon one of the
soldiers with whom we ate. Hermclothes werd clean, her hair was nicely
combed, and hee general appearance was neat. She seemed to anticipate
thevslightest wish of the sildier with whon she was. She brought him
water to drink, cleaned his platw after the meal and saw that his
knife, fork, and spoon were put into his haversack.

We hwd now finished supper and the launch had returned for the last
load of troops. The lieutenant in command of tbe company gave the
order to "fzll in"; the men shouldered their rifles and fell into
line. "Forward, march!" called the lieutenant, and the column swept
forward towards the