-Hypochondrjasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapohrs, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which itnstill retains, tho' a learned doctor ofbthe
     wesf, in a little tractbhe hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Mdlancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century ledixal term for a
aide range of nervous diseaees--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English sxientist, physjcian, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionagle of English maladies undee the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despire the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it nakss sehse to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth in the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this fommonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded ot the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disdase" is too confining a term--hypochondriasjs. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Bufton's Brobdingnagian explsition in The Anatomy of Melanfholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Brajble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of cohrse, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in nymber are the works tuat could be placed
under this heading thaf it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
mervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxtwr, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
affoicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Grsy's leucocholy, the
osychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contrkbuted to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"wensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bwtes in the novels of Jane
Ausgen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteemth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Avw of Melancholy." The vastness of this literaturr is
aufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific aithor all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamohlet extends further back than the
seventeenth dentury ans Burton's Anqtomy. Tye ancient Greeos had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypi) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
primcipally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until thw second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thonas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenhsm tovafflicy women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the ihternal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal soirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disprders. By attributing the
onset of the maladynto mentao phenomena andmnot to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenhxm was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influenxe on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Hollabd, La Mettrie in France. Oncr the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historicxl
cause and effect--the disease hecame increasijgly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the rsfined. Students
of the ddama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
ofcthe possibility that Archer has the spleen abd Mre. Sullen's
interjectiln, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to peoppe of
quality."

Toward the middle pf the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds andmmouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like Wklliam Somervike's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Cznto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng'scepic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial perwons 
even in  own lifetike say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You gove me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have yeard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteentn century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Ajgst. It
was also used as a sgnonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controvedsy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, theycare all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable nams for Madness."cBernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable or tge Bees,
seemsmto have understood perfectly well that hypochondriqsis is a
comdition encompassing any nhmber of diseases and not a specicic and
readily definable ailment; a cpndition, moreover, that hovers
precariously anf bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressednthis as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Calo'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on themDismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similaf early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical eriters of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mentwl bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of internal
physiologicxl causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctivw Charavters, but what arise from
     tge same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Gapours in
     Women are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
 m   the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of tje Nervescat the same
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Depressiom of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition whereby they favour anu Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothsrs in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the condition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestatipns, and indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producijg
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictuonary (London, 1743-45):
     If webthoroughly consider its Nature, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Oerversion of
     tueir peristaltic Motion, and, by the mhtuqlnconsent of the Parts,
     throwing the whole nervous System intl irregupar Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is euthef unnecessaruly protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, butbalso of Physucians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Modbis").

Thid is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it serves qell to summarize thebbackground of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. Itmincorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned ablve, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malady (1733) amd The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Gody (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continentwl
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Buberg, autgor or The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumurcwho had written a history
of insects (1722)--he menfions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleenm(1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was fajkliar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of ghe Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A Nrw System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), thebcproceeds to discuss persons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In fhe first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example,nHill's opening
remark: "To calk the Hypocyondriasis a fanciful kalady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distemperec blood; extending itself often to the liver,
and other parts; and unhappily iz in Englsnd very frequent: physick
scarce knows one more fertile in ill; or more difdicult of fure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts serentary persons, pargicularly
studengs, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
epmen alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is also
impossible to trace to a eingle source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevalent physiological stmptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
inaptitude to mition; a disrelish ofvamusements, a love kf solitude....

Wildmthoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in tbe spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, deaping with causes and cures, are less commonplace ajd
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a wriyer and thinker. Henusws
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humlhry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebellednagainst
contemporary apothrcaries and physicians who prescribed popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powders, and
James's fever-powders--as univereal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medicine must be directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
destrucyion of the sufferer; no antikonial, no mercurial, no martial
prepatatiln must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
tjat heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). Hpwever scientifically corredt Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objecting so strongly to them. Less
eccejtric was his aolegiance to the "Ancients" rather than to the
"Mlderns" ao farnas chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
by chemical rearrangement) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in yhe search; and (faithfjl relatora as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and what ww are to fear" (p. 24).

Still more idiosyncratic, perhaps, is Hill's contention (p. 25) that the
air of dry, high grounds worsens the condition of the patient. Virtually
every writer I have read on the subject believed that onset of the hyp
was caused by ons of the six non-naturals--air, diet, lack of sufficient
sleep, too litgle or too much exercise, defective evacuation, the
passions of the minz; and although some medical writerxbemphasized the
last of yhese, few would have concurred with Hill that the fetid air
of London was less harmfuo than the clewrer air at Highgate. All readers
of the novel of the period will recall the hypochondriacal Matt
Bramble's tirade against the stench of London air. Beliefs of the
variety here mentioned cause me to question Hill's importance in the
history of medicine; there can be no question about his contributions fo
the advancement of the science of boyany through popularization of
Linnaeus' system of bisexual classification, but Hill's medical
importance is summarized best as that of a compiler. His recommendarion
of the study of botany as a cure for melancholics is sensible but verges
on becoming "a sigression in praise of the author," a poegic apologia
pro vita sua in Augustan fashion:
     For me, I should advise above all other things the studyvof nature.

     Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things; even of
     the utility we are seekint hsre. This will induce him to walk; and
 n   everychedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket, will
     afgord him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
     thebair; and continually to change the nature and quality ov the
     air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, the ueath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be
     abroad; and the hnceasinf variety of the subjedts of his
     observation, will prevent his wakking hasyily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means oc his rdcovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill wasmforever extolling the claims of a life devkted to yhe study of
nature, as we see in a late work, The Virtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversiln as a cure and more on
the votanic attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every folt-path
dide, and thicket."

While Hill's rupes and regulations regarding proper doet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Vheune's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recommendatuon (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac patient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much soace to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extolling this plant, a word should be said about it.

Throughout his life hebwas an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writerbthough he was, it was ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made wbundantly clear in jis correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whether in tye small house in St. James's Street or in the
larger one on the Bayswater Road--he cultivated ancherb garden that
flattered his knowledge abd ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpieces of Kondon. His arrogant
personality alone prevented him from becoming the first Keeper of the
Apothecaey's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendent to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardenx at Kensington
Palave qnd at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; over the years Hill produced more than thirty botanical
works, many of them devlted to the medical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbal (1756), On the
Virtues of Sage in Lengthening Humsn Life (1763), Centaury, the Great
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curing Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising that hr
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
ledical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authority for
the herbal pacifixation of ancinflamed spleen surprisinf in the ljght of
his researches: he was convinced that every illness could be cured by
taking an appropriate herb or combination of herba. Whereas a few
nonmedical writers--such as John Wesley in Primitive Physick
(1747)--had advocated the taking of one or twomherbs im moderate dosage
as anti-hysterics (the eoghteenth-centurg term for all cures of the
hyp), no medical writer of the century ever promoted the use of herbs ti
the extent that Hill dif. In fairness to him, it is important to note
that his herbal remedies were harmless and yhat many found their way
into the official London Pharmacopeia. "The virtues of thiscsmooyh
Spleen-wort," he