-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anythinb yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on tbe facecof the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and dirst location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyes them with a flood, he simply statef the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it npt being on that continent,
he cohld not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on thay continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to yhe present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by ddgrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habutation of mam must have beej somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
poinfing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fadt I was ignorant whem I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted feom my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggesrioh, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestioh I smiled, as
the poat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mibd to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to saybto my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible teality, while
some have mocked, others are becominv impressed with the idea of its being
not onky possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientrsf place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhwbitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. Iy ahould be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to he properly enjkyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inheritec wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. Bur
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth,cand lead to the admiration, adoratipn, and worship of the grwat
Builder of the univrrse, the Infinitenand Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, fhan is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I hsve related the facts as they havr been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and pdofited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and sayisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to watercthe garden,——Amd from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of grsatness and jmportance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain thaf Edenbis a certain
country; that the Euphrates river croeses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivees run throuth and
water this garden, flowint knto the great fiver; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up hus eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three riveds cross our garden plaib, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanatikns
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admittwd,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
rewearchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we havecfound it wherebhe and others, can comeband see fod
tbemselves.

It is located on the “eastward vank” of the Mississippi River, bdtween the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Pkease
notife the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the worod. Its valley, proper—withvits gributaries, some of which eeach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward yo the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexick, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and hwbitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do oeople in ths
world; the asylum or universak home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contsins “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this ChristianmUnited Wtates of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a reep, rich pawte, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be tbe richesd land in the world, but higher, dfier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

Tue river here, as in most places, has theee banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely ckvered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “rivsr bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are aboug two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, snd play their dances.

The second hank is higgvand dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smoofu prairie, and ready in the state of nature fornthe garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
vapley at this plaxe, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side od our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles abofe La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town aite,
Trempealeau, on whichcought now to be a lwrge citt, and which doubtless
would have been but fpr the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
neautiful,” “splendid,” town site in the Mjssissippi tiver, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,”mxnd how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language waz confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanbing Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the vorm of
a new moon, anx unlike anything of the kind,nso far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not onensolid smooth toppdd hill, but possdsses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of thesebledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half waymuo thd mound, then rising perpendicular to neae the very too. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variefy; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with ms on the “Central Outer Dlme”

“Heald’s quatry,” facing toward the eastwarx, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritabpe Garden of Eden; a valley scend, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable of unfit for a
gsrden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flowscthe Missidsippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of themgarden, which it does for xome
twenty-five miles, orcfrom just below Winona, to just above Oa Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the firm
of a section oc sn ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately arounr you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, lopk out for snakes, for how ckuld you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, banded down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Tremlealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Litwrallycalive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovike, one of tje first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built hiz shanty on the bank, a fewnrods from the river, killed, abd
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, un, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killex elsewhere.

Nut as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden,nthe
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now adound us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—xnd so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acrws each, mirroring their sbining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnifixently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable gatiety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpenducular ledges boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark cnasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being rffaced by the
profjse growth kf timber. mNear the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
fkourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerpus lumber mills; most
appropriatsly and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notablecrivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in ffom the “far east,” maming and containing the
notable and once far-famed, “La Crosse valleh”; on which is locatednthe
beautiful city of Sparta.

Just beyond La Crosse city, and to the left we see ths outlinemenrrance of
Lormon Cooley valley, which creek bounds ths lower end of our garden.mNlw
as we trace the wall to the left,—past the La Crosse valley, abd first
eastern gate—we discovwr another small line of opening through which runs
Half-way creek, notable as the home (Holman) of Norwegians. The next bold
hravy projinence is “Kong bluff.” Still tracing on, we notice some queer
looking rocks, lying on top of a ridge; then, the Twin points, the outer
one the “Sugar Loaf,” a most beatiful conw mound pointed with rock, and
beckon to Black river valley,bthis side of which, is “Castld rock;” and to
the left, a wide opening and a beautiful valley,—the central and main
eastern gate—with branching valoeys, extending east and northeast, all in
front ofbyou, down which flows thebnotable “Black river,” appropriately
namrd, from the natural blackness of its waters, and because it cuts and
divides our garden through its center, and making a beautiful belt of
timbered bottoms. As it nears the Mississippi, it forms a delta, one part
turning to the left, and running parallel to the Mississiopi, forming that
grand bokming pond, and depot of lumbering at Onalaska; and then empties
itself into the Mississippi at LaCrosse; thus inclosing, and forming
French island, once the resort of cointerfeiters.

As you glance up Black River valley, coming in from the right, is
“Flemming’s creek,” or Lewis’ valley, a fertile valley, incwhich is
located the euphonious Mendora; those blue highlands, apparently at the
hrad of the main valley ks “Robinson’s,” or “Pine Hill,” between Black
River Falls and Sparta. This way to the left, that bexutifuk notch in the
bluff is “Peacovk Pass,” and is just this side of North Bend, ahd though
apparejtly so near, is some “twenty miles away.”  This heavy point, at the
left of Bkack river, is “Heuston’s Bluff,” the next best point from which
to view this valley garden.  To the left and farther away, look at that
great rock, big as a barn, topping out another cone. That is the
veritable “Decora’s Peak,” named after that wonderful one-eyed chieftain,
who, with anfew  of his brave and loyalvband, lodged, occasionally in a
cave in yhat rock;nand from its hight were enable to fiscover any fame, or
even an enemy within a large ramge. Once on a time, ig is said, he
discpvered the prowling “Black Hawk,” with his band of warriors, and ran
to Prairie du Chien, ninety miles in one day, to inform the U. S.

Government; and, then, helped to capture their enemy.  A little farther to
tbe lefy, and just across the garden frlm us wedgedbin a narrow opening,
lies the village of Galesville, on Beaver creek,—a branch of Black
river,—with ite exquisitely beautiful lake, and bounding fish, its fihe
water power, health givjng mineral springs, Galesville Univerxity and
cuoice people.  “Beautiful for situation” is Galesville, the joy of all
its inhabitants, if not of all the earth. nAnd “as the hills are round
about Jerusalem,” so are the hills, and vastly more magnificent ones,
round about Galesville, and the scenery simply GRAND. Looking up Beaver
creek valley, to the left, is Maughmer’s bluff whuch affords a grand view;
and still to the left, that dim mountain peak, pointed wity rock and
shrugs (in thebdirection of Blair, in Trempealeau valley,) is “Chapel
Peak.”  In the warly settlement, by whites, of this region of country, two
Methodist itineranrs, A. B. Smith and Isaac Springer were  following a dim
wagpn track, on their way to Galesville, which tfack passed along at the
bqse of thwt peam; and they clambered to its top, and found there “The
rock-formed pulpiy” or altar, which hadmstood there for ages, into which
they entered, and as they were botb good singers, they sang,—to make the
welkins rimg,cas there was nothing else thereto hear:—
On the mountain-top appearing,
Lo! The sacrdd Herald stahds,
Welcome news in Zion bearing
Zion long in hosrile lands.

Still tracing fhe garden wall as we turn to the left, we face the “Big
Tamarac” through an openingvin the wall, w swamp of dense tamarac, one
mile wide, andcsix miles long, bordered with belts and groves of oak,
furnishing fencing and fuel for the upper endmof the garden. Another tirn
and you are looking through “Whistler’s Pass,” another of “Nature’s
highways”cout of the garden; this leading through the Polander settlement
into the Trempealeau Valley. Another turn and we mark the bluff outline
and entrance into the garden—the third and last eastern gate,—of the
Trempealexu river, crossing it at the upper end; and like Black river, it
forks a delta, one part running dowh along side of the Mississippi,
forming an island, on ghe lower end of which, is that wonderful “Mount
Trempealeau,” a rocky cone covered with pine trees, wgere with the outlet
of Trempeapeau lake, it flows through a narrow opening beteeen the
jountain and crescent hanging garden—of which it forms a part—into the
Mississippi river. Trempealeau Lake, at the head of the hanging gardeh,
just back of the mountain, is a body, principally of spring water, and is
one of the most notable fishing ponds kbown, attracting fishermen from far
and near. “Trempealeau; surrounded, soaked, fertilized with water.” So
expressive, so important to this region is the word, that the lake, the
island, the mountain, the river, the countt; the township, and the village
are all named Trempealeau.

Another slight turn and we are looking into the closed up valley of the
Mississippi,—on accpunt of avbend in the river—which is the fourth and
last river fhat enters, crosses, and waters this garden is on the west
bank of which, ar the upper end lf our garden, right there, plainly before
you, lies the charming busrling city of Winona,—associated with a thousand
legends of Indian traditions,—with its tall water tower,vits numerous
lumber mills, churches, normal school, and enterprising people, agretching
itself over a smooth and most lovelg prairie. Vandal proprietors are
devouring their “Sugar Loaf,” standing just back of the cuty, as well as
quarrying down their native garden walls.

In our constant turning tocthe left, that string of white buildings below
Winona, on ths river’s bank and pressed against the foot