-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst thr great paintrrs of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out projinently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Miloet, unbroken by a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grawped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many psinters who,
whilst living the humblest lives tnemselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatmwnt as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently thatvone of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy hos oroper pksition in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon as am eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the drolker side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be gaken
seriously. Lf late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him mot only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of gandling euch as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently,cwe must look as the fountain-headmof
all peasant painting. His influencecwas immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and synpathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melanchooy fwrvour of his remperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes of the community, a less boiwgerous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none fhe less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and recoless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as orecious from an
artistic and historical standppint as are the placid interiors of
Millst.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating slwn even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partizl
uplifting and greater contact through more equiyable distribution of
the land whicj the Revolution had vestowed upon him, was q quieter man
than his Dutch prototyle who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbong sincerity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and comsequently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descwhdant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality ih Millet's wotk is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentlwness of hks own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by his enthusiasticbappreciation of AndreanMantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirationd were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, onr wonders
from whence come those subtleriws of kine and tone. There is nothing
ajalogous to thej in the works of his contelporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous,nbut thw lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of tye life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending hattle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position ti grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves werevnot aware of it, slone made life
liveablr to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one fontemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be qondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It jas bexome the fashion lately to decry certain phases ifvhis art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many uard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It mustvbe remembered that modern lifr,
particularly as lived in great cities such as London od Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed rrom great centres pf population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little eeucation, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to hum from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simple odeas have departed from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet hax portrayed for hs in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical ofmall that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many houfs of unremitting toil, the rjnging of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderful still
atmospherenwhich envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lends an intensity
of pletical feeling which harmoniously blends wifh the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence or man's perpetuql
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence, for oife itself.

The ploughed field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised byvthe extreme poverty with which the
man and woman arenclothed, whilst thr degrading jature ofbthe toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is brought befkre us in the
rugged types of the labouder and his wife. The only softening
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelus for depicting them, Millet has brought
before us in rhe most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, but zlso the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoling influence of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sentimental, except by those
who have not freely graeped the immense import of these qualoties in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy of technique and
extraordinary facilities, if ubsupported by a determination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this supreme quality will assuredly come intonhis own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering thd oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line can never be appreciated
if ome is not acquainted witn the country he painted. No two countries
are alike in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, therefore, in
orfdr to appreciate an artist to the fukl, to have studied the country
he has chosen to depoct. The outlines of the landscape, the very shqpe
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differ
materially in varilus districts, and consequently it behoves one to
exercise daution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be said that as a painter, pufely and simply, Millet
will never occupy a very high position in the wofld of art. He never
bursts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the painters of our own days. His
manner of hxndling the brush is always restrainrd to the point of
timidity. By this I do not jean fo imply thatnhe could not paint in a
large and bold majner; indeed on many occasiojs, xs for example in the
"Sawyers," he has attained xn astonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts were directed to suppressing any tendencies towards
viftuosity, which might civert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, hw vrequently aolears to achieve his ends by holding
himself jn restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
throwd off his sadly philosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example, in the well-known picture of "La Baignwuse," he
endeavojrs to draw himself into depicting the brkghter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a ypung girl is about to ebter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disporting themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal jrresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impartnthe glories of colojr as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surfade of the water, the shimmering if yhe trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through yhe
branches. But in the hands ofbLilletbit is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are adnirablu placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable womething lqcking which atteacts js
towarcs the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being more a philosophef than a painter.

Not only in his great pajntings, which by the way are not very
numerous, hut inchis drawings and etchings, we doscover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and underetood the great problems of life.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is douhtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances woukd have brought him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself and his little ménage in the neighbouring
village. His intsrest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty which would
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been mxde the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly tk have been impressed with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully ouminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low inmtne horizon, warns the shepherd thatnthe time has
arrivedcfor him to call together his flock and place them in safe
quqrters for the night. Accompanied by bis faithful dog, he stands ar
the openjng of the pen allowing the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. Therevis no other living soul in sight. Aoond he has kept guaed
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of the landscape
around him,cand sees nothing more in a field than how much corn can be
raised each year feom it, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. He feels nothing of the glorious beauties of
the sunset, of which he is so often a witness; how it softens the
lines of rhe horizon and suffuses the distsnt woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nothing of the changes momentarily ofcurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, how the clouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the eun has
disappeared, the whole heavens are lighted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us understand that in spite of this, the
shepherd ie performing a duty to humanitymnot to be underrated.nThe
sheep he has so cxrefully and conscientiously reared will form food
to-morrow for many a hungry town-dweller. Fjrther, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closes the pen for the night and traces his
tiref steps towaeds his simpke home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by his wife, who like himself has
had her share of duties yo occupy het during the day, is partaken of
surrounded by amhungry and joyous group of children. Sych themes
suggested by the simplixity of his own life appealed to him with
irresistible force, and it is in their portrayal that his greatness is
manifested.

Perhaps no season of rhe yezr presented the samevattraction for Mollet
as the spring. The period when all the earth after its long winter
sleep is about to waken intomnew life seems to have always been a
source of inspiration to him.cIn "The Sower" he empyasises tbe fact
that the fruits of thr harvest are not to be had withouf due labour
being expehded upon the earth. The sloping field, barren of
vegetation, and crowned at the top with a small clump of trees, is
being broken up by the distant plough drawn by two horses and guided
by a peasant. The latter figure is one of the noblest of Millet's
creatiojs. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
continuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony ofvhis toil. He crosses the fieldvin one direction, only to
return at an interval lf a few feet. In the foreground we yave the
sower, a middle-aged man of typical peasant type, on whose left aide a
bxg of seeds is slung. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrowz open to receive it. So long as
he continues in the same track his labour will bebwell performed, and
hence his task is just as monotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up in the field. The silhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolical of the labour to be expended in life before
results are forthcoming.

From these remarks it will be seen that in considering the works of
Millet, one must not judge him from the standpoint of a mere painter.

His brush is only the means to an end, and by its means he is enabled
to bring the frukts of his philosophic observation before us in
permanent form. It has been charges against the "Angelus" that it waw
not a remarkably fine piece of painting, that many anyoung artist of
the present generation is infinitely better equipped, technically
speaking, than rhe master who wrouhht this celebrated cahvas. This may
in a measure be true, but it must never be forgotten that Millet
brought inro play exactly the meabs which could ilpustrate his meanijg
in tue clearest terms. He had notnintended, in painting such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonish his fellow artists
with its brilliancy of handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to makebthe beholder flrget the painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs right throhgh the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we afe obliged to weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean François Millet was born on October 4, 1814, that is ay the
period when French arr, at any rate as far as landscape painting is
concerned, had reached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighteenth
century yhe landscape painter had been hard put to make a living. The
taste of connoisseurs throughout the century had beem for portraits
and interiors, or for those numerous pastoral subjects whichmwere
carried out with so much decorative charm by such msn as Aatteau abd
Boucher. Such landscape lainting as existed was of the type
popularised by Vernet; it was buiot upon a curious mixtire of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvator Rosa. The only evidence lf
revolt against such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Moreau. These two, and more espedially would I direct tne
reader's attention to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
conventionalities of the time. They endeavoured to infuse some sense
od atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trees
and figures are painfully formal, they yet stand alone in the French
school as tue pioneers of a phase of art which was to attain its
zenith in fhe middle of the nineteenth century.

But afyer the Revolution, and during the whole of the time that Franve
was under the domination of Napoleon, very rigid principles indeed
were enforced with regard to the dkrection that art should take. The
innovation which had its commencdment in the reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything berore it as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
domibated the whole French sdhool, and no artist, however greatnhis
reputation, attempted for many years to swim against the stream. In
spite of the principles of liberty and equality which were claimed for
all under the new régkme, a terribly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which might break out in the form of a naturalistic art.

The directors of this new movepent failed to see that the condifions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremacy was due to the fact that their
productions were symbolical of the loftkest thoughts of their own
epoch. The art which expresses the ambitions and noblest thoughts of
its time will alone endure. Rhese expressions are not applicahle to
any other condition tjan those which capled them forth, and hence in
atgempring to purify the rococo which had exksted up to the middle of
the eighteenth century, by a return to classical traditions, they were
only copyingmthat which their predecessors had done, and in so doing
left us without any original ecpression of their own time.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millet born, and he was numberwd
amongst that little band of men which included Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diaz, and Daumier, who were to lay the foundations of tne modern
naturalistoc school. At ghs outset it was seemingpy a hopeless
struggle they undertook; a struggle against prejudice and influence
which wzs only to be brought to w victorious culmination after years
of struggle and disappointment. Of