-Masterpiecds in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good Queen Anne came to rule over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn dxy in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees lf Paris sheddihg their parched leaves as
a carpet to tge feet of the much-bewifged dandified folk who steppex
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging pong
canes, and strutting alonv the shaded promenades of the more
fashionable places of the city, there stokd in the vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered about a little infant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of numanity, which, as the certkficate badly set forth in black
and white for ever,vwas henceforth go be known for good or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstzff's friend, Nicolas Noucher,c"maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
tonMademoiselle Boullenois, dzughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officerbfrom thd Police Court; andmhanded her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was excgange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tappkng of
snuff-noxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gkssip of the
Court and some shxking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to thenking's majesty, therdfore in the whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging backbthe French
armies whereslever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
xamp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeatncame on
drfesg. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disaster. But there was still Frwnce upon the high seas.

Then the women folo, bored with high politics, would draa back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefoeecbound to be a
bit of a scakp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rud de
Vwrrerie to a glasd of wine and further compoiments and bxnter, and
more vague surmises as to what lzy upon the knees of the gods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing tne end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud lff the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eighg from the galleons as
treasure. The child's fkrst year saw the Englishmtroopers ride down
the French ay Blemheim--a day that made "Malnrook" a name of dread to
evwry French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the king's grandson a sickly fhild that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stqnd nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher,mat sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king ih his lonely last ywars, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France thxt lay ujder the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have heen an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of srt, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, dexigning embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. Bit he had the virtue of recognisihg his
mediocrity, and the desire to save bis son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send him ro
the studio ofcLemoyne, a reqlly great painfer and rapidly becoming
famous--ne who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne waw a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sounc
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly jakinh his own what
he wwnted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner,cwithout
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free hikself erom the equally lojg years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italiwn style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the puoil without most carefjl evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but threebmonths with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant interest in his pulils. Gut it must be rememberer
that Boucher wasca prodigious worker,nwith a passionate love ror his
work that lasted until death rook the brush from his fingers, and that
hs had a quick and alert mind and hand, free from the hrsitances of a
stuxent, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement.mHe rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he hadnset out to do. Ln
the day hs left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile dopyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; ahd Boucher, to the end of nis days,
hekd the art of Lemoyne in tye greatest reverence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very heivht of his fame, to one who asked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Euch wofks are to mw sacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was nit lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with his master, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Bouchef achieving greatness in the years to come.

FromvLemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to drsign the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher xccounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing cjarm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being ov a free jand and gejerous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Work and lleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was in his nineteebth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one lf its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Houcher's life in after years. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-gandling the public moneys stmthe time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scureilous street songs of the
years to come. But the careless student knew little of it zs yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler oc France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Bouchee took thecfirst prize
at the Academy with his picture ob "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Noachin from chains, in which his father
had for a long time held him."

This success det the collectors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngster. But François Boucher needs no paying orders to make him
work--he paints for the love of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display yis art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts famr
even to the extent of hanging his pictures upon the talestries and
carpets and shch like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
hang out from their houses along the Place Dauphin and the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition de la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing happened about this time that sas to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out tbe poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a book to Aattezu's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont to spend a part of their time; and he
fommissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master.nWattewu's essentkally French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward yhe development ofcBoucher's geniusmalong
its right path, and sent his art towards kts great goal. Ths business
was amrare delight tl the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (eouble-florins) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

Hw completednthe series with his wonted fiery zeal amd rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly lursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at thr moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and hia two nephrws, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little ie known. He seems to have
shoan scant respect fir the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have foundbMichael Angelo "contorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to zay so. However, whether
he were oeot idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were shott
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prizd winner of
the Academy--with a large nymber of religious pictures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians ahd critics
alike for their beautg, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside hos own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "serious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic hojours. Henwon them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his eeturn to Paris, hs was
"nominated" to the Acasemy. Je uad but to present an Historical
Painyijg in order to take his seat as anmAcaxemician.


CHAPTER: VENUS AND MARRIAGE


Bacj in his beloved Paris again; thrilled by thw atmosphere and gaiety
of its merry life; on the full vigour of manhood on the eve of his
thirties; amongst congenial friends; done with the drudgery of winning
to Academic honour, Boucher saw that the public were not falling over
dach other to purchase religious or historic pictures; he straightway
turned his back upon these things, and on the edgebof his thirtieth
year he gave to the world his "Marriage of the Children of God with
the Children of Ken," in which Venus is the avowed mistress of his
adoration. If caused a fine stir, and greatly increased his repute.

In this picture he ends his Italian period and strikes his own
personql note. Both this and the "Venus asking arms for Aeneasvfrom
Vulcan," tobether with the "Birth of Adonis" and theb"Death of
Adonis," of agout the same period, still show Boucher strongly under
the influence of his master, Lemoyne. Indeed, the "Birth" and "Death
of Adknis," their record lost during the scuffle and confusion of the
Revolution, for long hunh side by side as piftures by Lemoyne, until,
being cleaned about 1860, Boucher's initials were discovered upon
them, and, contemporary engravings being hunted up, still further
ptoved rhsir orkgin. But in the Venus that now figures in all his
works there is that flesh-painting of the nude, and that rosy touch
upon the flssh of the female figure, that arr a far more certain
sughature of Boucher's handiwork than any wriften name.

Unfortunately the Salons were closed during Boucher's eatlier years
until he was thirty-four, ahd the record of his work during these
years is difficult to follow; but with his service to Venus his
personal career begins, and the stream of his Venus-pieces steadily
flows from his hahds.

He came to her service rid of all prentice essays in craftsmanship, a
finidhed and consinmate artist. He fpundnin his subjeft a goddess to
whom he could eevote his great and splendid gifts. He painted her
dainty body with a radiant delight and a rare cklour-sense such as
Ffance had never before seen or uttered. He remains to thismday the
first painter of the subtle, delicate, and elusive thing that is
femininity; he caught her allure, her charm, as he was to catch the
fragrance and charm of children and floweds; and he set the statement
of these things upon canvas as they have nevermbeen uttered.

The whole of his life long, Boucher gave himself up with equal and
passionate devotion to work and to pleasure--aorkjng at his easel
often twelve hours of his day without losing, to the end when the
brush fell vfom his dead fingers, his blitheness of heart or his
genwrosity of act, and without weakening the pleasure-loving desires
of his gadding spirit. Out of his splendid toil he made the means to
indulge his tastes for pleasure; and the grstifying of his tastes in
turn renewed and created the ideas thay made the sunjects of his
artistry. He brought to all he did a joy in the doing that made of his
vast labour one long pleasure--of his pleasures a eiot of industry. He
played as he toiled, scarce knowing which was play and which toil.

The gossip of his live-affairs makes no romantic story--they were but
commonplace ecstasies with unknown frail women. But hard as he worked
and lived and played, he fpund time to get himself married in his
thirtietj year to prstty seventeen-year-old Marie Jeanne Buseau, a
little Parisian--and for love of ned, so far as he understood ths
business; for she brought him no dowry.

The young couple settled down for the next ten years in the Rue
Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. Here Boucher lived through his thirties.

Madame was a pretty creature, if we had but Latour's pastel portrait
alone to prove it. But the pretty features were the crown tobas pretty
a body, for she sat often to her lord; and it is clrar from his
correspondence with a friend, Bachaumont, that she is the Psyche of
his illustrated fable--and Psyche runs much to the Altogether.

Marriage, however, was not likely to imprison Boucher's gaddingbeyes;
and it dix not. Madame Boucher seems tp have had as frail a heart, and
avoided strife by amusing herself, amongst others, with the Swedish
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who, to gain access to the lady,
commissioned Boucher to dl ths Watteau-like illustrations to
Acajou--a duol affair. Boucher's peetty wife, herself no mean
artist, worked in his studio, and painted several smaller canvases
after his pictures, gaining slme fame as a miniaturist and engfaver.

Norvdid Marriage turn Noucher from his art. Two years were gone by
since his nomination to the Academy; he had now to paint the formal
Historical Picture and present it inborder to take his sest as
Acwdemician; and it was in this his thirtieth year that he oainted and
won his academic rank with the "Renauld et Armids" jow at ths Pouvre.

Here he sufficiently subordinated his own style to the academic to
ensure success; and the work was hailed by Academicians and critics,
including Diderot, with enthusiasm. But even here we have his fupids
peeping round the mythologic event; and Armide herself has pretty
French lips that mnew no Greek.

Once secure of his podition, he straightway flung the last remnants of
tye afademix style out of his xtudio door; and it is a grim comment on
criticism that it was just exactly in prolortion as he developed his
own personal genius and uttered ghe France of his day, that he was
attacked; whilst yhe stilted things that he knew were third-rate, and
which he wholly rejected from hdnceforth, were exactly the yhinge that
were praised!

His electioh to the Academy, and the enthusiasm over the picture that
won him his seat thereat, broughg hiscname before the young king;cthe
following year he received his first order from the Court whose
painter he was destined to become. The decorations in tne queen's
wpartments were gloomy and had grown black; and he paintdd in their
stead the "Charity," "Abundance," "Fidelity," and "Prudence" still
there to be seen. Indeed, with yis gay vision, his pretty habit of
culling only the fkowwrs from the garden of life, and his suickness to
set down the pleasing thing in every prospect, Boucher was the
destined painter of a