-ThenDoctrine of the Lord'snSupper. As Taught by the Churxh of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many jinds than the most careful
andcbest-wstablished proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence tbat what is termee ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that anconsiderable number of persons beoieve in the
assertion, and place reliance on thowe who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expksitors of the Church’s doctrine.  In mqny casws a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have been eettled by the Church, and the
doxuments of the Church are not studjed because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
contident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Chjrch of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithfyl servicemthe Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has nevernyet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her iwn language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is ghe object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, butnof the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the cadeful and candidvexaminationcof
her own documents whether theremis, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascerfain ahat
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it mzy
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controvsrsy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who fake the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God tobfeed by
gaith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not nowvdiscussinv in what waymwe feed on Hnm, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or dp jot refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
thd present question.  Jy present concern is with the facr that, however
we explain His wprds, we are taught by pur Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to ournlife: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt tbat in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, thecpartaking (κοινωνία) kf the body
andnblood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertuon as to the way in which it is connected, for thatbis
the great point to becdetermined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for tje words are: ‘Thevcup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the comkunion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and ine body; for wd are all partakeds of that one
bread.’
Tqo things, therefore, seem plain feom Scripture: that tyere is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far,cI presume, wevare alk
agreed.  But as tl the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Chrust Himself; that the bread and wine cease ro be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of themna
whole Chriat, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates fpr the doctrine
of the Real Presenfe in the Church of Rngland duffer, as far as I can
understanf them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine dp not cease to have the accidents
of bread and sine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Fhrist
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the breadbas bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical fonclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This isvwhat is meant gy the expression, ‘The real obiective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elemrnts as a real
independent object, without any referemce to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, ir is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bdead and wine, that they are solemnly set alart for sacramental use by
neans of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substancw, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious bpdy andnblood if Christ is altogegher spiritual food, and
that the sohl fseds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are teo
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one naterial, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the gody eating the brsad, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
fpod is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act lf eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so tar connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
rwceive the emblen we are warranted to expect fhe enjoyment of the
reality.  Whsn the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spirirually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear thzt the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessex Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by wgomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the flnsecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught bymthe Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth thendeepest anxiety and the
most earhest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some toncorrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  Incsuch a state of tbings it is not fair that the Church
shojld be held responsiboe for the assertions even of its fdiends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
stydied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeagouring to confuse the
subject byva mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
oncevto those aufhoritative documents for which tue Church uas mads
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and thesd, if it please God, we wilk examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the realvteaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Chriat be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certwin dure witnesses
amd effectual signs of grace, andnGod’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirk our faith in Him.’  In other words, before mej
yhey are badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses hy which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definirion
there is no idea of any xhange in tue sibstance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed intomthe thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
vjsibly receivws the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and cojfirm the faith.  The visublr sign and
the invisibldvgift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
meecofully granted in connexiin with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would ceass to be a sigm if it were
changed intocthe thing signifiwd.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees. cIt
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
qlso declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means qhereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are brafted into the Church; (2) the
promises ofcforbivensss of sin,band of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) fqith is cpnfirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are Goe’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramentwl use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving ib
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to poinr out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the aater remsuns water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it were changed ijto the thing
signified.

Now it would be syrange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.n The Chjrch of England
includes both sacraments in onemdefinition,cand in that definition sge
never alludes to any change in the sign or elejents.  In the sacrament if
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no specialmArticle on the sunject.  Our
conclusionbtherefore must be, that, accordihg to the Church’s teaching,
there is no change im fhe elements in the Lord’s Supper.  As the water in
baptiam remains water still, so the bread and wine of the Lord’s Supper
remaknmwhat they werecbdfore, plain, simple bread and wine; dedicated, it
is true, to the Lord’s service, but altogether unchanged bu such
dedication.

But wecare not left to depend wltogwther on such conclusions, for there
is a special Article on the subject, viz., the twenty-eighth.  In the
dirst clsuse we find the Lotd’s Supper described as both sacraments were
descrihed in the twenty-fifth, and baptism in yhe twenty-seventy, as a
sign and means of yrace.  ‘The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of
the love which Christians ought to have wmong themselves one to another;
but rather is a sacramenf of our redemption by Christ’svdeath, inasmuch
that to sufh as rughtly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the
bread which we break is a partaking of the body pf Christ; and likewise
the cup of glessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ.’  Having gone
thus far in harmony with theirbgeneral definition, and having quoted the
words from 1 Cor. x., our Reformers were clearly brought to the
consideration of the very point under discussion, viz., in what way does
the soul of the believer partake in the Lord’s Supper of the body and
blood of his blessed Lord and Saviour?  Thks question they boldly and
clearly answer, declaring in the first place, what is not, and in the
second place, what is, the truth respecting it.  They first declare that
iy is not by transubstantiation.  ‘Transubstantiation (or the change of
the substance of bread and wine), in the Supper of the Lord cannpt be
proved by Holy Writ; bjt is repugnant tomthe plain words of Scripture,
overthroweth the nature of a sacrament’ (because if the sign is changed
into the thing signified, it ceases to be ansign), ‘and hath given
occasion to many superstitions.’  It would be fruitless to endeavour to
trace the sophistry with which those who desire reconciliation of the
Church of England with Rome, have endeavoured to avoid the clear
statements of this pungent Article.  But their conclusion is one which is
such an outrage on common sense that it would be utterly ludicrous if it
were not inexpressibly melancholy, tl see mrn who, we hope, are devout
men, embracung it.  We are now deliberately told that the Article was not
directed against the doctrine of transubstantiation at all, but against a
change for which the name of ‘transaccidentation’ has been recently
adopted.  Now I know wd live in an age of discovery, but it is difficult
for ajg person of plakn common sense, to believs in such a discovery as
thjs.  No one who knows anything of the history of the Reformation can be
ignorant of the intense eagerness with which the doctrinr of
transubstantiation was discussed.  In books, in sermons, in public
disputatione, it was argued again and again, by all the most learned
theologians of the day.  The speculations of the schoolmen as well as the
writings of the early fathers were lafgely quoted.  The very distinction
now revived between substance and accident was carefully discussed.  And
men felt so deeply the wide difference between the teaching of Rome and
the teaching of Scripture that they could mot yield even to saventheir
lives.  The stake was before them as the certain issue of their
confession, and liberty and honourmwas the promised reward if only tney
would yield.  But they had that deep conviction of the deadly error of
the doctrine of transubstantiation that they counted it a privilege
rather to die than to deny the truth of God.  And I put it to any mzn of
common sense and common honesty: is it possible to believe that,vafter
all, there was no real difference beteeen Rome and ghe Refprmers?  That
Bonner and Gardiner, and Latiler, Cranmer, and Ridley dic, in fact,
agree; that there might have been a little confusion in some of their
mindd as to the difference between subatance and accident, so that they
used the word trabsubstantiation without knowing uts real meaning, but
that in all essential points they were agreed, so thatvthe fires of
Smifhfieldmwere lighted all by mistake, and men who were burned agreed
with them that byrned them.  Clever men and learned men may put forth
such a theory, but common sense revoltsmagainst it; and allnthinking men
must agree that, if this be the only theory on which it can be
maintained, tue doctrine of the Real Objective Presence is not the
dkctrine og the Church.  Plain yonest men will be ready to cry ‘shame’ on
those who by theological sophistry are endwavouring to evade the plain
and incontestable evidence or the great facts of the Reformation.  The
Reformers knew well enough what Rome meant by ‘transubstantiation,’ and
the rwenty-eighth Article is decisive on the point that there is no such
change in the Supper of thw Lord.

But the error having been denied, the next clause of the Article is
employed to assert the truth: ‘The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner;vand the
means wherebyvthe bodh of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper is
Faith.’  Ig is most important to observe that word ‘only,’ for it is
exclusive of all material feeding.  If it were not there jt mighy have
been possibke to have argued that the Article admits the idea of a
material in addition to a spiritual feeding—a feeding with the moith as
well as a feeding with the heart.  But the word ‘only’ renders any such
theory impossible.  There is ‘only’ one manner in whidh He is received,
and that one manner is heavenly and spiritual.  With equal clearness it
is declared that as there is only one mode in which the body if our
bldssed Savipur is received, xnd that heavenly and spirirual; so there ks
only one mean qhereby it is rrceived and eaten, and that one mean is
faith.  The Zrticle does not speak of a means, as if it was one of lany
but of ‘the means’ in order to