-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
ocfasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that thevearth was the
Lord’s, and the fulnezs thereof; secindly, thatbit was the geritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of thek thwmselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistrees of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we xannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the gline, has been disastfous to the
communities duled ovdr, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases wd have had selfish rulers and incapablecofficers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Austtalia and New Zealand are the
better for our dule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the pasr in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rkch, and the expenditure hax not been an unproductive one.

We havevsacrificed valuaboe lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mouod the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilitoes beyond
our means, and find ourselves ehgaged in contests utterly needless in the
ciecumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Afrifa is concernee,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subjdct to drought, and seels
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expwnsive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
deafer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusementsvof akl classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thujderstormd are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to wll decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writesnSir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emivrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rifh country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficiejt scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonidt is dure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does nof drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are ocvupatjons which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter ks almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all pravtical purposex it may be accepted as the truth.  If
tuis be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to gey possession ofmthe country?  Rhe ansser is, We hold ths
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of reduge
on our way to India; but the opejibg of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a pejny by the Cape remains
to be pfoved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of rhe Pilgrim Fathdrs,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans mudh after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
ridcof the nwtive difficulty wasva very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pfingle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disafreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of thw
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
wirh them.  Ths men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an wffort go shake off the British yokd.  A
Hottentot, bamed Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s iffice at Cradock,
and complained ov the oppressive conduct of a Boer of thr name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’svorder, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hoytentot to be a prrsumptuous innovation upon his rights, anc an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defoance both himself and the magisgrate who had sebt him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severebbeating, and then bade him go
andbtell theccivil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they shoule dare to come upon his grounds to ckaim the property
of a Hottentot.  It mustvbe remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in anh way
asked, each Boer had perfsct control over the liberty and ljfe and limb
of everynHottentot under his control.  It was pnly thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncuy.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.c An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair escited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Hoers
in the neighbourhood,bit was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; byt,
it is needless to add,vin vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no moof to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat tne Boers as
absolute enemies, and they eere rewarded with a large portion of ths
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundqries, and, with their livds
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In thaf year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the ehame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent wasjnever paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
solx their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession if
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what wkll be its dost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally diffucult to say upon whom rhe blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by ndcexsity and fools byna divine thrusting on.  We
sgould have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory;band, at any
rate, in 1854 theur independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and tne Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations mihht have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate,vhas kade himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him phyxically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, ans built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruutful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he ssid, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shapl pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peoplsd Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abomination, dwfilef with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, onlu too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet commsnd the admiration of the world for the
psrseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its piomeers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, anx
severxl hundred poundd’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasoonbthe Boers and Doopers (adult Baptista) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Hplland the English would not take them, but that if others weee printed
in London theg would certainly be as good as a Bank of Englandvnote.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and then some amusung scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, lne day, to pass sime measure
for the opwninb and improvement of the country, when the ipponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringijg
forward an old law that allvmembers should be attired in black cloth
suits and whige neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next dlor, slipped out,mdonned
hjs Sunday best, with a collar xnd tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-lrogressionistd.  The latest authority, SirbArthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still tbe characteristicvof the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this diztant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks that they left the room in which he was exhibiting, and,
assembling in prayer, sntreated to be relievee of the devil wyo had come
amongst them.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made z miscalculation, which the Goer pointed out, appealing to hks
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite repliwd,
“Oh, this is a ready-refkoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illustration of their simplicity is to bd founf in the fact
that when they trekked from tye Cape they fancked that they wers on their
way to Egypt, and, having reafhed in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls ijto the Limpopo, thought theu were there,vand called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordanxe with their serious
twaching, they gave Scriptural names to their seytlements anc villages;
and it they were severe on the natives, andbruled them with a rod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similarnmanner to the Hiviyes and the
Hittites, and dud not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lkrd?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim kn them. mIy was to escape British rule that
they, with their sives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and their sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth into the wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possessionmof Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
countrychaving been desolated by the King of the Zulus.  Kt was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile wkthout interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would hacw settled, as did the Pilgrim Farhers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If they had been allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been saved a
good deal of trouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away rhe emigration
required to develop the resourcesbof a countryvhappily situaged in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous anf untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed to beg.  Natal, had tnecDutch
been left peaceably in posseesion of it, woyld have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Oagans who have fled there fromvthe crueltoes of theur native kings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Natal,
the English shkpkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where thenBoers hold sway it is othedwise.  In the Dutch parts
of yje Cape Coloby, Captain Aylward writes: “The coloures people are
tame, submissive, and industripus, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
yhrough the Transvaal,” comtinues the same writer, “I saw in various
ditections gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living ih a condition of ordinarh
propriety, having abandpned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had not npticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that wevhave made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determination not to be
Enhlish the women, according to Captaih Wylward, have been a wonderful
aid to the men.  They hwve suffered for that xpirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rifh lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were wgite for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those wuo
had formerly lived in affluence but were now in comparative want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompanying the insecure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers by the savage, still rejected with scorn the odea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the ken began to drop or lose courage they
urged them in to fresh exertions, and kept alive the spiritbof reaistance
wifhin thek.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame has nothing but praise for the
Borrs.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, tje Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a pwlace.  It was byilt by the subscriptoons of
his parishioners.  The honours which thq Dutch lavish kn the ministry are
worthy of remark.”m Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farmer gives his guest the best entertainment he can
provjde, and “before the famioy retires to rest the large Bible is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the residence of a rich Dutch farmer, who
refused admissipn to his house and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymk floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch bsing
distinctly heatd leading the choir, while female goices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Skr Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a religions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the peopls are contentdd and
happy.”  Sir Adthur writes:—“There arenno finer young men in the world
than the youbg Dutch Boers, who ars generally of immense heihht and size,
and very hardy.  Their life is