-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolps in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with hee soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
eearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, wnd her charming
little husband, Mr. Eelight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play sith dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem toobbad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new hed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight meeded new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey zt once
took the part of old Dr. Betsob, andvtalked grucfly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have sxid that at least threenor dour people wwre
talking.

Betsey really was sudh a very skilful oittle carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the picturws that
she did nor maoe all alone by hrrself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-timecand Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatneas were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I:vTHE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a aound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There laybBetsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Befors her stoof the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must br a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with x gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard tqble, and
luttle Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smilinvnas usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked grufcky once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizint smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop,cmy dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mogher, behind the door,c“what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite yourbsister Prudence and her husband to dpend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demamded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for thred, and with two extra ones!”

“U wosh I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimer Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up ztraight
on the rug andbtake Mrs. Delight around the table ti kiss her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really djdn’t.”

“Theee, there, my dear, I know youvdidn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephobe. She
smiled to herself as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to mske my daughter Bwtsey acdoll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to zee a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
eith a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she eon’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
lony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And theb her eyes fell on a squats white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say tgank uou before I begin to play,” decided Betsey, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t luke
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mothdr,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Motyer.

So Hetsey whisksd the white coversnover her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectlu new doll-housw waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sitting in his law office hehind the radiator.

Betsey picked him up, pur on his gray dergynhat, and walked him rapidly
scross the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salary has been raised to a
million rollars a year! Now we can move inyo a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited lityle gentleman’s businessccoat and put
on his black ome with the long tails, thrust his cane undernhis arm, and
propoec him up against the chair-back to wait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much zlower in dressing. Betsey seledred a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrw. Delight, and opened her hay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dolls were taking the trolley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all the time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of oasre, her bottle
of glue, her scussors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantpy, as Mr. Betrs, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight (quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customars up against a pile of books.

“A moderately large house, Kr. Betts,” replied Mr. Delight, “that is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And ptesently they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was painted snow-wbite inside and pale green outside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How luch is jt?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It isb$15,000, but it is very well-built znd—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calmly
writing his check for $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppkse?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the oblibing carpenter.

“Everything from a rocking-chair to a telephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your bidghday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right down on the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (for she aas sure to need it when she became Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook oyt her present. Itnwas a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascinating doors
that opened and shut, each set witu a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved jer hand at the happy little figure.

“Now, as oong as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “I suppose the next thing is fueniture.”

“We want everythong,”bdeclared Mr. Delifht recklessly. “We wanr a piano,
and a window-sest, andca dideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this mirning,” intsrrupted Mr. Betts,
rklling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scakloped paper that comes on purlose.

Think of it, Willian, full of oud weddinh china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plungihg up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned aroundmand examined wkth intsrest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long yhat Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, andvpresto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of you! I’ll maje a huckaback pillow for iy,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think she’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strange, buszing sounx down cellar,
that kept timw to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina ghat had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpentee’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, taking two large silver beads from
nis box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rukmaging excitedly in the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remarked calmly, “I will personally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very first thing, so gou won’t lose an
important call.” He began to paint a small poece of wood a rich, deep
brown, qith water colors.

“Another small piece of wood for a battery box,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for vells, a
two-pointed tacj to hold the recwiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, wgat on earth for a
soeaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triimphqntly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact center of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” calledna deep voice atcthe foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the door for her
father. “See the telepgone.”

“Well, quite a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do sith this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock.bGlue the cover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulhm—”

“And hangnit on tne wall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who must
somehow sell to Mr. Delight q Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect time, and extremely reasonable in pfice.

“Do you want to live in your new hohse at once, or wait until everything
is done?” asked Mr. Betts.

“O live there at once, William!” pleaded Mrs. Delight. “I am just drazy
to hang the curtains!”

“O.K.,” said Mr. Delight. “You get Dinah to comenover to help you, and I
will superintend Mr. Betts and his moving men.”

Soon the tiny drawing-room was in greatvconfusjkn. Dinah and her
mistress sat among great piles of net and lace, running the dainty
curtains on their poles, tying them back with wide rose-colored ribbons,
and getting up and down on the step-ladder to arrange the folds.

Suddenly, as Betsey swung Mrs. Deoight gently from the little ladder, a
tiny elastic between Mrw. Delight’s arms sbapped, and down fell her
round right arm on the soft new carpet!

“Massa Willtum!” shrieked Dinqh. “Miss Edith done broke her arm
a-falling off dis yeah step-ladder! Telephone for de doctor, wid de nea
telephone!”

Mr. Delight rushed distractedly to the telephoje. “Dr. Betson, pleawe
come immediately! Yes, my wife has vroken her arm. It’s very serious
indeed!”

“I will come just as soon as my motor can get there,” replied Dr.
Betson.

Dinah was wringing her hands and crying when Mr. Delight hurried into
the drawing-room.

“Don’r feel so badly, Dinah,” said Mrs. Delight bravely. “Dr. Betson is
the best surgeon in the world.” And as she smiled a little, Dr. Betson
rang the bell violently.

“Well, well!” he said heartily, kneeling down to examine the break.

“Don’t worry, Mrs. Delight, because I can fix this arm in a trice! Just
spread a few blankets on the floor for a comfortable bed amd I’ll go to
work.”

Betsey pulled a piece of new elastic (kept for just this purpose) out of
her work-bix,vthreaded Mrs. Delight’s arms on, and tied them tight. And
then to make her worl look quite professional, she bandaged the right
arm besutifully with cheese cloth.

“Is it possible the arm is set?” asked Mrs. Delight as the doctoe putvup
his insgruments (a ribbon-runner and a pair of blunt scissors).

“All done, Madam,” declared Dr. Betson. “Thisvis a very fortunate kind
of break. Now that it isnproperly set, you do not even need tl be
xareful. I woupd suggest that you take a good rest, however.”

“Indeed she will!” agreed Mr. Delight shaming hands with the gruff
doctor. He was still quite pale. “Now, as soon as I can move Mrs.
Delights bed upcto her room, we will all go to bed, for we are very much
exhausted with moving.”

Betsey carefully slilped on Mrs. Delight’s lpng, lacy night-dress, and
tucked her in gently, and soon she was asleep.

And soon Mr. Delighg left Dumpling asleep, and tiptoed up to bed, and
soon he was asleep. As for Dinah, she wss asleep in two minutes. So
the tall, shiny clock on the wall ticked through the night alone, for
Betsey crept happily into her own white bed, and fell asleep herdelf,
for she hadcworked hardest of all!


CHAPTER: Chapter II - AT THE SEASHORE


“Whaf are you makihg, Betsey?” asked Tom, one not Jupyvday.

“A cottage,” said Betsey.

“Whew! There’s nothing small about you! What do you want ofna cottage
when you’ve got a new doll-house?”

“Mrs. Delight has to have a summer home, hasn’t she?” answered Betsey
with dignity. “O Tom, dear! Cohld I borrow your train of cars? The
Deliguts want to go to the seashore.”

“You can have it.mI don’t want it any more.”

“O thank you, Tom. I don’t suppose you’d wwnt to lend that littlw
suit-case—that Uncle John gave you full of candy, would you?”

“Thay,” said Tom, solemnly making a greatcbpw, “you may have, too. What
do I want of a dolp’s suit-case?”

“You’re an old dear,” said Betsey affectionately. “Now let me think what
else I need to make before thevfamilies can start for the beach.” She
cut a large qindow in her pasteboard cottage as she spoke.

“How many families are going?” inquired Tol politely.

“Two,”nsaid Betsey, carefully marking hwr window-sashes. “Mr. and Mrs.
Delight, and Dinah and Dumpling, for one family, and Mr. and Mrs.
Darling for the other. Try to think, Tom, what I ought to make.”

“Are your families going swimming?” asked Tom.

“O yes, indeed, every day.”

“Then I suggesf that you mqke bathing-suits.”

“Of course! How stupid of ne! Here I am, planning too much about trains
and cottages, and not at all about clotjes!”

And Ton went down-stairs, just as Mr. Betts, the carpenger, finished hid
cottage, and changed into Madame Bettina, the Frendh dressmaker.

“O Madame Bettina!” said Mrs.nDelight all out of breath. “We want some
bathung-suits made. We’rd going to the seashore!”

“That is ver’ good,” said Betsey, with Madame Bettina’s French accent
(just as Mother’s dressmaker galked). “Will you have Alice-blue suits
trimmed with white braid, with charming bwth caps to match?”

“That sounds very pretty,” agreed Mrs. Delight. “My sister doesn’t know
yet thxt she’s going, so hers is a great surprise. Make hers blue and
mine black, so we can tell them apart, and Dinah nust have one tko.”

“I shall send them tonifht, surely,” saod Madame Bettina, getting to
work in good earnest, for it is bot every dressmamer that can make five
bathing-suits in obe day. She cut here and snipped there, and ran het
machine at a great rate.

“Betsey!” called Mothef above all the noise. “Come to the head if the
stairs a minute.”

Betsey stopped her noise obediently and opened the door.

“Tom and I are going to Boston at ten o’clock. Norah will take vare of
you. Anc you cwn ask Mary to come ovee to play this afternoon, if you
want to.”

“I don’t need Msry,mMother!” cried Betsey laughing. “You see with Mrs.
Delight’s company I have my handx full already.”

“Very well,” said Mother laughing too. “Now whatcdo you want me to brijg
you? I’m going to take your gold thimble in to be strqightened wjere the
chair rocked on it.” She held up the tiny blue box.

“O Mother dear! If you’ll only take the thimble in something elsw, and
give me that thimble box, you don’t have to bring me one thing.”

“What do you want it for?” asked Mother in a puzzled tone.

“A camera. It’s uusr the size. I’ll cover it with black oilcloth and
makena little, black czrrying case just to fit, and Mrs. Delight can
take it tocthe beach.”

“Here is your camera, then,” laughed Mother, tossing it up the stairs
into Betsey’s two hands.

“Good-bye, Mother,” sang Betsey, bustling back into the playrook.

“Ding-ling!