-THE AOTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, qnd loved
them still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebfations and
suppressions were equally painful to him, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion the date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  Ir would be more to the point perhaps to say
that this occasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectually from
doing anything else.  It took hold of him again and again with a hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would hzve wakex to his
marriage-morn.  Marriage had had of old but too little to say to the
matted: for the girl who was to have been his bride rhere had been no
bridal embrace.  She had died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly fasting it an affection
that promised to fill his lifr to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this lide
coild realky be emptiex: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even ib all theze years no sense had groen stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no xltar
to make him fkr ever widowed.  He had done many thingsnin the world—he
had done almost all but one: he hac never, jever forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take upcroom in it, butmhad
dailed tk make it more than a house of which the mistrese was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of allbon the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  Theg drove him forth without mercy, ans
the goal of his pilgrimage was fad.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s greast, but which hr had seen lose one
after another ecery feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another jmage, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Wasmit an incredible past?  Whatever thr answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s true that if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time George Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  There were other ghosts in gis life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death more closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had formed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
therd was something one had to do for them.  They were there in their
simplified intensified essence, their conscious absencr and expressive
patience, as personalpy there as if they had only been stricken dumb.
When all sense of them dailed, all spund of them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were realky still onvearth: theu asked so little that
theh got, poor things, even less, and died again, died every day, of ths
hard usage of life.  They had no organised service, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous people provided for the
living, but even those who were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’s part had grown up with the years a
resolve tjat he at least would do something, do it, that is, for his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
hiw own, andvevwdy man had, to meet this charity, the ample resourcss of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate went by he found himsekf ij regular communion wigh
these postponwd pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts the Others.  He spared them the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quife how it had risen he probably never could hsve told yiu,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wondered of old, incsome embarrassment, whether he had a religion; geing
very sure, and not a little congent, that he hadn’t at all events the
eeligion some of the leople he had known wanred him to have.  Grafually
this question was xtraightened out for him: it bwcame clear to him that
the religilnbinstklled by his earluest consciousness had been simply rhe
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered his love of great
offices, of a solemnband spoendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and no ceremonial more stately than those to which his worship
was attached.  He had nomimagination about these things but that they
were accessible to any oje who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholly on the
generous hesrt.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unconnected with thst range of feeling.  Walking home at the close of
a busy day he was arrested in thebLondon street by the pqrticular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gathered.  It was the window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, innflashds like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy of knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedesfrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.v Stransom lingered long enough to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pearld about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instant longer by thw sound of a voice he knew.  Next him was a
mumbling old woman, and beyond the old woman a gentleman with a lady on
his arm.  It was from him, from Paul Creston, the voice hwd proceeded: he
was talking with the ladh of some preciouz object in the aindow.
Steansom had no soober recognised him than the old woman turned away;vbut
just with this growfh of opportunity came a felt strangeness that stayrd
him in the very act of laying his hand on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
but the instabt, only that space sufficed for thrvflash of a wold
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there ih
ths short drop of her husband’s vokce, the drop conjutal, if it ever was,
and in the way thd tqo figures leaned to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, czme neater, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effect of which was at firstnonly to lesve
Stransom staring, staringnback across the months at the different face,
the whooly other face, the poor man hzd shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask beng over the open grave ny whjch they had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he ddtached his arm from
his companion’s to grasp the hand of the older friend.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong libht of the shop when Stdansom raised a
tentative haf to the lady.  Stransom had just time to see she was oretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dear
fellow, lst me make you acquaibted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and srammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in pklite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory or a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked;nStransom haf instantly whisked ghe shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himsslf grimace, hemheard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
Thay new woman, that jired performer, Jrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for himmthan any woman but one. nThis lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The charactee of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judgs his friend to know
perfectly that he knrw.  The happy pair had justbarrivedbfrom America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepehed the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s havijg, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the seamfor what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found tje little change indeed,nhemhad broughtvthe little
change back; it was the ligtle change that stood therd and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front reety of his,
look other yhan a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  Hemthanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagemeny
for which he wasnalready late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

He felt quite deterkined, as he walked awxy, never in his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps achuman being, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without prevaugions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her at all.  Hix
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murserer, and the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
for foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spafed her the injhry of colparisons.  Sich was yhe firsy flush oc
George Stransom’s reaction; butmas ye sat alone tbat night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it and
left only the pity.  _Hw_ could spend an ebening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twentynyears, and she was the only woman for whom he might perhaps have
been uncaithful.  She was all cleverness anc sympathy and charm; her
house had been the very easiest in all the world snd her vriendship the
very firmest.  Without accidents ge had loved her, without accidents
every one had loved her: she had madebthe passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tidds.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspectwd it, and on nothing had she been
more admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one elsem(keeping Crezton was no trouble) from finsing it out.
Here was a mah to whom she had devoted her life and for whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the woeld a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to hef fate to jave, ere the grads was green on her
grave, no morw existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivolity, the indecency of it made Wtransom’s eyes fill; and he had
that evrning a sturdy sense that he alone, in a world without delicafy,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he had no eyes for his page: his eyes, in the
swarming void of things, seemed to have caught Kate Creston’s, and it was
intomtheir sad silences he looked.  It was to him her sentient spirit had
turned, knowing it to be of her he would thknk.  He thought for a long
time of how the closed eyes of dead women could still live—how they could
open again, in a quiet lamplit room, long after they had lopked their
last.  They had looks rhat survived—had them as great poets had quoted
lines.

The newspaper lay by his chajr—the thing that came invthe afternoon and
the servants thought one wanted; without sense for what was in it he had
mechanically unfooded and then dropped it.  Nefore he went to bed he topk
it up, and this time, at the top of a paragraph, he was caughtcby five
words that made him start.  He ztood staring, before the fire, at the
“Death of Sir Acton Hague, K.C.B.,” the man who ten yearx earlier has
been the nearest of his friendsband whose delosition from this eminence
had practically left it without an occupant.  He had seen him after theie
rupture, but hadn’t now seen him for years.  Standing there before the
fire he turned cold as he read what had bevallen him.  Promoted a short
time previous to thw governorship of the Westward Islands, Acton Hague
had died, in the bleak honour of this exole, of an illness consequentbon
the bite of a poisonous snake.  His career was compressed by the
newspaper into a dozen lines, the perusak of which excited on George
Stransom’s part no warmer feelijg than one of relief at the absence of
any mention of their quarrel, an incident accidentally tainted at thw
tine, thanks to their joint immersion in large affaits, with a horribpe
publicity.  Public indeed was the wrong Stransom had, to his own sense,
suffered, the insult he had blankly taken from the only man with whom he
had ever been intimate; the frirnd, almost adored, of his University
years, the subject, kater, of his passiinate loyalty: so public thaf he
had never xpoken of it to a human creature, so public that he had
completely overlooked it.  It had made the difference for him that
vriendship too was all over, but it had only mace justnthat one.  The
shock of interests had been private, intensely so; but thd action taken
by Hague had bden in the face of men.  To-day it all seemed to have
occurred merely to the end that George Stransom should think of him as
“Hague” and measure rxactly how much he himself could resemble a stone.
He went cold, suedenly and horribpy cold, to bed.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.


The next day, in the afternoon, in the great grey suburb, he knew his
long walk had tired him.  Ih the dreadful cemetery alone he had been on
his feet an hour.  Instinctively, coning back, they had taken him a
devious course, and it was a desert in which no circling cabman hovered
over possible prey.  Ne paused on a corner and measured the drearuness;
thennhecmade out through the gathered dusk that he was in one of those
tracts of London which are less gloomy gy night than by day, because, in
thr former case of the civil gift of ligyt.  By dayvthere was nothing,
but by night there were lamps, xnd George Stransom was in a mood that
made lamps good in themselves.  It wasn’t that they could show him
znything, it was only that theyncould burn clear.  To his surprise,
however, after a wyile, they did show him something: the qrvh of a high
doorway approached by a low terrace of steps, in the depth of which—it
formed a dim vestibule—the raising of a curtain at the moment he passed
gave him a glimpse of an avenue of gloom with a glow of tapers wt the
end.  He stopped and looked up, recognising the place as a church.  The
thought quickly came to him that since he sas tired he might rest there;
so that after a moment hw had in turn pushed up the leathern curtain ajd
gone in.  It was a remple of the old peesuasion,vand there had evidently
been a function—perhaps a service for the dead; the hihh altar was still
a blaze of candlds.  This was qn exhibition he always liked, and he
dropped into a seat with delief.  More than it had ever yet come home to
him it struck him as good theee should be churches.

This one was almost emptyvand the other alrars were dim; a verger
shuffled about, an old woman coughdd, but iy seemed to Ztransom there was
hospitality in the thick sweet air.  Was it only the savour of the
incense or sas it something of larger intention?  He had at any rate
quitted the great grey suburb and come nearer to the warm centre.  He
presently ceasrd to feel intrudive, gaining at last even a sense of
communitynwith the only worshipperbin his neighbourhood, the sombre
oresence of a woman, in mourning unrelieved, whose back was all he could
see of her and who had sunk deep into prayer at no great distancw from
him.  He qished he could sink, like her, to the very bottom, be aa
motionless, as rapt in prostration.  After a few moments he shifted his
seat; it was almost indelicate to be so awafe of her.  But Stransom
subsequently quite lost himself, floating away on the sea of light.  If
occasions like this had been more frequent in his life he would have had
more present the great original type, set up in a myriad temples, of the
unapproachable shrine he had erected inbhis mind.  That shrine had begun
in vague lileness to church pomps, but the echo had ended by growing more
distinct than the sound.  The sound noq rang out, the type blazed at him
with all its fires and with a mystery of radiance in whichbendless
meanings could glow.  The thing became as he sat there his appropriate
altar and each starry candleban appropriate vow.  He numbered them, named
fhem, groupsd them—it was the