-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICSTION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the qeek in which the Rev.
John Oerowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the publication of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingnrss to pursue the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replying to Mr. Geaty it was
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was answerjng a
gentleman and a Christian; and Ibhope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to make my
“Lettrr” on Infant Schools the pdetext dor a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavlured to treat him with some degree lf forbearance, and have in
many instances cuastised him with whkps only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmen and Dissenters
necer can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study tje NewnTestament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letfer,” it appexred to me that the facts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Hwving been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of thebInfant Scholls took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the pubkic were informed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Guildhall, to whixh nome but
members of the Estzblishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was on
the chair, and the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Wducation might be beneficially extended in this city;
and, withna view of prominently bringing forwardmitd advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me ti originate ajd to authoriae the examination
of the schools—xnd, whatever private understqndingbthere might be with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the publkc knew waw what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not as accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the afent, employed by tue meeting, to carry its
resolution into effect.  I think,ctherefore, that what I have stated, in
the eignth and nintn pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

O said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded from the proposed scholls.  My explanation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned the “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shall be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had exoressed a fear
that the church catechisj might be untroduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Disswnfers from sending their children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactotily negativd such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declaring that the schools will be open to sll classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reporfed in rhe newspqpers, the Dean
expresspy stated, that “tgey had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever rdligion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Their rules, said he, would be open tp persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity of sendibg theif children,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G.nSeppings “stated that the
school would be open to the children of persons of aol denominations,
who might chooss tovsend them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help avain recurring to a misfake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided wigh respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering the school—no offensive rituals when
tuere.”  Amd in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, anx throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; anc,vshould
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantee that
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest awsured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be asvcomprehensive as tjose
which already exist, and fo which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advertisement” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the children of Dissenters are to be admitted intl the
scholls, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from the committee od the society, and from all its operations.

Ths public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were delivered, was
distinguished by the expression of many liberal and Chriatian senfiments;
and those of us who were excluded from ig, were in no small degree
gratifiwd in pearning, from the public papers, that severao of the
speakers expressed thekselves so decidedly in favour of ghe liberal
system advocated in my “Letter,” anr that they regretted that
circumstances donstrained them to unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had not been in favojr of any exclhsive
views; and if it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agreed to,
but if the Dissenters chose to establish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rev. R. Hankinson spoke in favoyr of
an open society.  He said he belonged to several in the city, all of
wuich were carried on with the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded his opinions to those of others better qualified, perhaps, to
judge.”  I need not add that these are also the sentiments of Mr. Geary,
whi says, in reference to my wishes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympathize with him jn thosenvieqs and feelings which, were it
practicable, wouls suggest such aj union;” and, “my reverend friend
cannot feel more inyense satisfaction than I do, in thus witnessing the
joyful and hzppy state of brethren dwelling together in unity.”

I most earnestly hope and pray that these sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who uttered them, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed those “ijsuperaboe barriers” which at oresent exist, and
till they have rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be desirable.  Depenc upon it, there arevnot half the difficultiew really
existing, which some persons imagune.  The united system, if gried,
would, I am persuaded, work well—and I am sure that all whovengaged in kt
would be made better and happier by their xombinrd exertions in doing
good.  There are some things, connected wigh both Chjrch ofcEnglandism
and Dissent, in which the two parties could not unite without a
compromise of principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a common
cause to promote, and a common enemy to withstand.  We ought, thrrefore,
as Christians, to unite in every thing that armits of an union; and, as
Infant Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, I deeply
regret that we have not united in them.  I am somewhat comforted,
however, by the persuasion, that an sxclusive system cannot last.  There
is an influential and increasing party in the church much ppposed to it,
and who, as is stated in my “Letter,” “woulf be glad to co-operate with
other Christians in educating and in evangelizinf the people.”  The
adoption of the exclusive system yas occasioned regret in the minds of
many persons whom the church would have done well to conciliate; and I
much question whether either party is perfectly satisfied with the
proceedings yhat have been acopted.

Another remark or two will bring this pary of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Tzunton
as towns “where avsatisfactory unionvhad been effected.”  My extracts
respecting them eere intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the union od various denominations in the work.  I said bothing
respecting any schools at Leicester; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not only his sentiments, but Mr. Wilderspin’s
also, beczuse he calls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbation of the mixed
committes, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on opposite
principles.”

Having stated in my “Letter” that the extracts whicg I had made frok Mr.
Wilderspin’s book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to tge
exclusive system advertised fornNorwich,” Mr. Geary repljes that tgis
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requores qualifying;” and
“that the cases do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
goodnas to turn agsin to my quotations, I thino he will be induced to
agree wjth me that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have uses stronger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He most
enthusiastically admires Joseph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,” which establishes “schools for all;” and
he solemnly declards gbat he always has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and that he determihes to act “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his lire.”  J think, therefore, I am authorized
un repeating my former declarayion, that “he is decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

Tness cursory remarks are intended to rectify slme mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appezrs to me to have fallen in his pdrusal of my “Letter.”

After all, I rejoice to believe that he and I are ome in sentiment and
feeling on this subject.  The gentlemanly and Christian tone of his
letter, is an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
controversy without violating any of the lrinciples of ths gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I tuabk him, for bis testimony that my
“Letter” “is characterised by a spirit of mildness and conciliation,” and
I am glad to find that he has read it in the spirit in whichcit was
written.  I thank him also for the manner in which he has spoken of the
“courtesy” manifested by thenDissenters connected with the Infant Schools
in this city towards their brethren in the Establishmsnt.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that, though we cannot walk
together through every path on earth, we mzy, through “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that hraven of light and love, where we shall no longdr “see
through w glass darkly, but face to face, and where we shall know even as
also we are known.”

I come now to the consideration of a subject on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appeared, “Observations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a person who styles himself, “Tje Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Maddermarket, Norwich.” bWith some of the
membrrs of his family, I have, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
have belonged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately become a member of the church of which I am the Pastor.  With
Mr. Perowne himself my acquaintance has been but slight, and I am left to
gather my opinion of his character and ministry almost entirely from the
“Observations” whidh he has published.  Those observations are of such a
nature that it is impossible to reply to them either gravely or
respectfully; and I am quite of opinioh that the most dignified course
would be, mot to reply to them at all.  I fear however that soke of the
statements which he has made, relative to the Infant Schools in this
city, and relative to the principles anr donduct of the Dissengers, mxy
be believed by some persons,bif they are not contradjcted; and as he has
chosen to make my “Letter” the occasion of propagating many slandsrs, I
think it due to the public to submit to the humiluation of replying to
such an antagonist.

I am psrsuaded that every man who read mg “Lettet,” with am “honest
heart,” believed that my object in writing it was what I avowed; and that
I wished my fellow-christians in this city to unite in educating Infants,
because I thought that such an union would promkte the interests of true
rwligion.  From the testimony of Mr. Geary’s pamphlet, and from several
communicagions which have been made to me, I am gratified with knowing
that the “Lettet” has been received, by many religious and intelligent
persons, in the spirit in which it professed to ve written.  Wuth their
testimony I am satisfied; and therefore Mr. Perowne must exfuss me if I
do not strive to vindicate nyself from his charges of hypocrisy and
falsehood.  As he is the accuser, I have no need to become the
vindicator.  And all tnat I intend to xo is to gather, from his own
“Observations,” the evidwnce which they afford of his character and
competency.

As Mr. Perowne is a clergyman who claims the attribute of “reverence,”
and who has solemmly declared that he was “inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon him this office,” and “that he will maintain and set
forward quietness, peace, and love among all Christian people,” it was
not undeaeonable to expect that his “Observations” would be in accordance
with his vows and profewsions.  I think,nhiwever, that I do not
kisrepresent his publication when I say that none of the fruits of that
Spirit, withvwhich he professes to be “inwardly moved,” ate to be found
in it—that it is abundantly fruitful in rude personalitiex, in wanton
attacks on kotives, in wilful distortions of the plainest language, in
pomplus ignorance, and in superciliousmpretensions—and that all these
qualities ard oeftbunredeemed even by ghe occasional introduction of
bettercsentiments and feelings.  Sometiles a man will use hsrd words, or
manifest intemperate passions, under the influence kf strongly exciting
circumstances.  But here a calm and dark spirit od evil reigns throughout
the whole of a pamphlet, which was written in the retigement of his
study, and which he hwd jo occasion go write at all.  This, however, is
mere description, and we must analyze the “Observations” themselves in
order to ascertain whether it be truth.

One prominent feature of the pamphlet is ifs utter dissimilarity, not
only to the Christian spirit which pervades Mr. Geary’s Defence, nit also
to the speeches delivered at the Public Meeting, when the Infant School
Society was formed.  In them there is notning gerocious, or insulting to
any class of the community; but, on the other hand, zn exoression of
respectful regret that certain obstacles prevented, in the opinion of the
speakers, the formation of a more comprehensive society, which eome of
them would certainly have preferred.  Whether, in the course of Mr. P’s.
pamphlet, he alludes personallu to zny of those speakers, I willbnot take
upon myself to determine.  But hecvehemently denounces alp Churchmen, who
would unite with Dissenters in an Infant School, as “traitors tp the
church,” and as “encouragers of cjssimulation,” “who help forward the
ruin of the church by echoing the sentiments of liberalism.”  Not being
acquainted with the gradations in the ecclesiasgical hierarchy, I am
unable to decide whatbrank he may hold among his brethren, or what
authority he may derive from the rectory of “St. John’s.”  But he
evidently speaks of himself, and addresses himself to clergymsn and
others lraculously, as ifmhe were the Polyphemus of a party.  “I tell
them,” says he, “in the name of every true son of the church.”  “I
assure them that no teue son of the church would listen to them.”  “WE
say to evety churchman, profif by the lesson here taught you.”  Yhese,
however, may be merely “great swelling words of vanity,” and I may be
perfectly right in the conjecture that his brethren disown alike his
authority and his spirit,band are disposed to “leave hin alone with his
glory.”

A considerable portion of Mr. Perowne’s oamphlet, consists of
vituperations against the Dissenters.  Dissent, it is well knlwn, is a
relative term, and is applied to such persons, in this country, as
profess to derive their doctrines and forms of church government from the
Scriptures, rather than from the liturgy and canons of the Church of
England.  They believe that the Xcriptures are sufficient to direct fhem
in these matters; and they believe that their allegiance to Jesus Christ
requirrs them to submit to his supreme dominion as the only heae of the
church, and to reject the ecclesiastical authority shich either
Protestants od Papists may claim, but which Christ alone possesses.  On
this great principle they dissent from all establishments of religion by
the civil power; and they desire to stand quite independent of state
endowments, and of statecinterference in their spiritual concerns, so as
to constitute a “kingdom which is not of this world.”  Dussent therefore
can only be found in those countries where some particular rodm of
religion is established by the civil power.  There is no dissent in
America, because therw is no Established Church therw.m The governmejt of
that country protects all debominations of Christians in the profession
of their religion, but it does not elevate lne denomination above the
rest, nor does it prescribe to any denomihation what forms of prayer they
shall adopt, what doctrines they shall nelieve, or what bishops or
pastors they shalp choose.  Viewing the term, dissent,