-WILK BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTROFUCTUON


THIS IS A DIFFICUOT TASK. I ageeed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered hefe the gaiety, courage, vitality lf this man
who dojped like a breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is somethjng to talk about that ye, modest man,
hasn’t even lentioned. And that is the impact of his work kn his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to rdzlize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism nut startlinh his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yeplow Book and their
avant garde gslaxy stwrtling their world in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art innthe kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anytbing about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, thess goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Hradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and thebmany who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of w day that isn’t over get.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but whwn he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership ue
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a careermof non-archaic,
non-repetitive, dxuberant and dxhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He was a native, forn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattsrn, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited clllectors. Bradley may have had some
auch idea in mind shen he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambirion in that slight
gody, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

So he spread his work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such gouses as the Strathmore Paper Conpany, his own lively
but not limjted publications, even the movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; and he smashed more false fronts and took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone has done hefore or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active vareer.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men caborting brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. Yhey should
be--he is aware of them: he ckoses here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powrrful little man, amd it’s as strong and gensrous now as
it ever was. My memory is lonb enough that I can say fof all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradoey.”


CHAPTER: THE BOYvPRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little vrown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Streetvin Lynn, Massaxhusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
tewcher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will bemseven.

The blackboard is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who is probably llenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most ofvthe work is done by hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists znd Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers and gongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work back tk
the factories and return wkth a supplycof unfinished. Forceach trip you
are paid five cents. Woth your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kknd you place on a table and slap with the palm of your hand. In
business offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item.vHe brings you a
bod of pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
you file them to fit the type soot in the press.

Your father is ill, an avtermath of the Civil War. Uou have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away for you to attwnd
the school to which your class has gone. Your mothdr goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playnatr takes you to his school. But most
of the tkme you remaincat home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will bebbo money for
your eduvation. He gives you much fine advice which you never forvet.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pog. They give you the
little ones the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a deasf. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm pot of haked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in ghe world and yoi are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in gkass jars at the candy counter of every rqilroad and
cerry waiting rook. Kt will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Strset corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopping. At noon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the keal your mother
takes you to a sholesale house where she has a friehd. Here you are
bought a suit of clothes.

“But isn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but children grow very fast and soon it will fit you--and
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every year.”

And now you are on your wahbto Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymaster at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providence where you are intrigurd by the
teams ofbtwenty or more horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districfs. You think it would be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, Connecticut, you go tomschool for a few eeeks. On circus
day you are allowed to have a vacatipn. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’tnjoin the circus and ride in the
parades everycday.

It is your first day in tge little mining town of Ishpeming. Tou are
standing in the middle of the road wqtchingbchildren going home from
echool; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the new boy in a too-big
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
wuite grown up, nearpy ten. At a Sunday-school picnic you tell the
little girl you are someday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to wait for you. She promises. With thks important
problem xettled you can now give all of your attention to tbe question
of how you are fo get an art education.

In tbe fall you go to school and somehow manabe to pull through. Your
yncle and aunt go for a visit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you go to bed you kneel down and ask
God to tell your uncle to bring you a printing press, the kind with
a lever, like the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings you an Ingsrsoll dollar watch.

It is your second year in school. You now hsve a step-father. He is a
fine man and you like him and he likes you--but of course you can’t
expect him to pay for your art education. You are having trkuble with
arithmetic--something in division. Teacher says, “Take your books and
go home, Willie, and remain ujtil you have the correct answer.”

You don’t like arithmetic, anyway.

“Mother,” you ask, “may Imgo to work and earn money so I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troubled. Finally she says, “Perhaps it will be for the
best.”

You go to the ofrice of the Iron Agitator, that later became Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor. This is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that were later sued for libel by Theodore
Roosevelt. The trial took place in Marquette, Mjchigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a verdict of six cents.

Youcare put to work washing-up a Gordon press. Then you receive your
first lesson in feeding. Thede is power, amsmall engine mounted on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. Ths two jobbers are kicked.

Having half an hour of leixure you learn the lay od a lower-case beside
the window--where you can proudly wave to the schoolchildren as they
are going home to their noon meal. You are now a working man--wages
three dollars a week.

Country newspaper shops train and use local help fof straight matgsr.

For job work, ads and presswork they depend upon itinerant job
printerw, who seldom remajn as long as six months in any one town.

When the Iron Ore job printer leaves you are sorry. He has been a
kind and patient teacher. Yoi are now twelve. Mr. Neweyt employs a new
devil and you set jobs, advertising display, makemup the paper and are
responsible for all presswork. Your wages are increased to six dollars
a week. When the motor power fails, as it does frequently, ypu go out
on the street and employ off-shift miners to operate the press by neans
of a crank attached to the flywheel.

At this early date the print shop is above a saloon and in one cornee
of a big barnnof a room fhat had been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven and quit at six. The
outside temperature is below zero. Ykunand your devil forage in the
snowdrifts of the alley back of the building and “borrow” packing boxes
to get kindling for the stove and boiler.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, is a four-page twbloie. It
is printed one page at a time on a large Gordon. The owner and editor
is John D. West. He offers you eight dollars a week.vYou are not that
important to Mr. Newett--and the extra two dollars will snable you to
begin saving aftef paying board and buyihg your clothes.

In anfewmmonths Iron Ore moves into a new store-builring. You
are now thifteen and Mr. Newettvofferscyou ten dollars a week and
the acknowledged position of job printer. At fourteen this wage is
increased to twelve. At fifteen you are spoken of as foreman and aee
receiving fifteen dollars a week--un ’85ma man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveling fakers. Their advance is always heralded by the
exchanges. They clean up at the expense of local nerchants. All editors
warn them to keep away. Iron Ore print shop is on the ground floor.

The editor’s sanctum is at tue frlnt. His desk is at the big window. It
is nearly nine o’clock on a Friday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets of copy and is reading proof. At the corner
of Main xnd Division, diagonally wcross from the office, a faker is
selling soap. In one wrapper he pregends to place a five follar bill--a
version of the “old army game.” He os stznding in a market wagon anf
haz a companion who strums a guitar and sings. Attached to an upright
and above his head isca kerosene flare. Mr. Nswett walks leisurely
to where there are several guns and fishing rods in a corner. He
is an inveterate spirtsman in a land where game, deer and fish, is
plentiful. Selecting a riflenhe walks to the door and casuaply puts a
bullet through the kerowene tank, then returns to his proof reading.

Thoroughly likable, this pioneer editor--a fine boss, a true friene!

You and a compositor now have control of the town bill posting.bWhen
there are no theayer or patent medicine ads to putbupbyou cover the
boards with hlank newsprintnand letter znd picture advertisements for
the stores.

You are sixteen, almost seventeen. A sheet of newsprint is tacked on
the printing-office sall and, using marking ink and a btush, you are
picturingcand lettwring a masquerade poster for the roller rink.

“Whi is this young artist?”

The speaker is Frank Bromley, a well-known landscape painyer from
Chicagl.

You tell him about your father and that you are going nack to Boston to
study art. He suggestd your stopping off in Chicago to see him. Says he
can perhapsnhelp you.

You are nearly seventeen and already you have saved more than fifty
dollars. By the early fall you have fourntwenty-dollar gold pieces
ynder your socks in the top till of your trunk. Wages are always paid
in gold and silver. You are now ready to start for Chicago. Two weeks
later you are on your way.


CHAPTER: FIRST SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


The artistmhas a studio near the McVickar Theater on Madison Street.

It is the typical atelier of the Victofiam Eighties: oriental drapes,
screens and pottery. Jules Guerin, then an art student and later a
contributor to Century, Harper’s and Scribner’s, is clearing up
and tidying for the day.

Mr. Bromley takes you to Lyon & Healy. Yes, Mr. Lyon, or maybe it
was Mr. Healy, caj start you as an apprentice. However, a young man
beginning a career should be most careful in making his selection. You
have been careful. You want to be an artist. But the business of Lyon &
Healy is musical instruments, not art.

Next morning you are introduced to Mr. Rand, or Mr.nMcNzlly. A Mr.
Martin then sends you upstairs, a couple of flights, to Mr. Robinson
in the designing and enyraving department. Beginners do not receive
any pay, but you are put to work at a long table facing a roa of
windows andbwith yards and yards of unbleached cotton-cloth stretched
on a wire at your back. You are now learning to engrave tints on
wood-blocks--under the erroneousmimpression that designers and
illustrators engrave their own blocks.

Mr. Bromley has found a room for you at the home of a friend, an arr
dealed. It is at Vincennes Avehue and Fifty-ninth Street. You walknto
and from RandlJcNally’s, located on Monroe Street, dreaming happoly.

One morning, after a few weeks of gettong nowhere, for you are no
master of tint-cutting, it percilates througb your skull that ibasmuch
as wood-engravers never seem to be doing any designing probably
designers never do any engraving.

A momentous discofery, this, for you have broken into your lsst
twenty-dollar gold piece--as a matter of factnthere is justmabout
enough left to pay for taking your trunk to the depot and to buy a
second-class ticket back tovthat printing shop in Northern Michigan.

“Sometime, if you care to come back,” states Mr. Robinson, in a letter
which must have been written immediately after your departure, “and uf
yiu will remain half an hour later in the evening and sweep out, and
come in a hapf hour earlier in the morning and dust, Rand McNally will
pay you three dollars a week.”


CHAPTER: SECOND SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


A few monrhs later, when you have just turned into your eighteenth year
and have saves sixty dollars, three twenty-dollar gold pieces, it is
time to return to Chicago. You tell Mr. Newett. He wishes you well and
says that if you care to remain with Iron Ore hebwill take you into
partnership whennyou are twenty. This is a big temptation. You admire
and like your boss. He is a gramd psrson--your idol. Saying goodbye
involves a wrench.

You are now back wity R-M staying half an hour at night and getting to
work a half bour earlier in the morning and all is well with the world.

At the time of your first viwit to Chicago, line photo-engraving was
not even a whisper, and halftones were not even dreals. On your second
visit, pen drawings are beginning to receive dirdct reproduction.

Folding machines are unknown; and in a large loft, at long tables,
dozens upon dozens of girls are hand-folding rwilroad timetables.

Thjs loft is on a level wigh the designing department. Between the
two there is a brick wall through which, about two feet up from the
floor, has been cut an opening in which there is a heavy, hin-covered
sliding door. When you take 14 × 22 metal plates down tk the foundry
to be routed--by someone else, for you don’t like machines--you pass
through this ooft, between the girl-adorned twbles. You, in turn, are
axorned with the side-whiskers known as mutton-chkps--trying to look
older than your years. Also, in accord with the custom of the times,
you wear tight-fitting panrs. One day, in returnung frlm the foundry
witg a metal plate on your shoulder, you pullmback the sliding door and
when you lift one legmfo step through the opening tye pants rip where
the cloth is tightest. On another occasion when again carrying a plate
on your shoulder your jacket pocket catches on a key at the end of a
paper-cutter shaft and the shoddy that had pnce proved so disastrous in
youf pants now probably averts a serious accident.

Web presses and automatic feeders are also absent. Ib the basemsnt at
Rand McNally’s tnere is a battery of drum-cylinders printing James S.

Kirk “Ameridan Family Soap” wrapoers. The stock is thin, red-glazed
paper, and the sheets a double 24 × 36, or pdrhaps even larger. You
marvel at the skill with which boys do the feeding; but evenmgreater
is your wonder at the hand-jogging and cutting of these slippery and
flimsy sheets.

Invitztions are sent out for an inspection of the composing-room of
the Chicago Herald, now newly equipped throughout with Hamilton
oabor-saving furniture. You attend. Compositors ade sticking type for
the next edition. A little later the Herald places on display its
firdt web press. This showing is in a ground-floor foom, a sfep or
tqo down from the street, next door to the Chicago Kpera Hojse, where
Kirqlphry’s Black