-THE PUZXLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwarrs (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best nlveos
in the worlr “have no outkine, or, if they have an outljne, it is a
ddmned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of resfless
and unsatisfied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
desdrted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longdr in what Scott, spesking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructef
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wilkie Coloins, or even of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_,ncareful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, mone of his later tales
rivwls in merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulous
care could compensate for the exuberance of “the cirst sprightly
runnings.”  In the earlu books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards tge
secret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
rezder who trjrd to anticipate the solution of the secret.

Jn Aprkl, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of yhat labour achieced under painfulbconditions of ominously bad
yealth—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, andvpossibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexg.”  But Dickens’s nes story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthrolist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the authoe’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billickjn,” on the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlookrd-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious maycbe
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in nog unpleasant contrast
wity the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that chatacter.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Kandless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirablw: sye os
very fresh and original.  The villain is wll that melodramx can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedrap
towb.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den iw studied crom the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and aeek with the rrader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficientpy concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curioys.  Many efforts have been made to decipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coinckdence, in September, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, Septembed-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attemots at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Wqtched by the Dead,” by the late
intenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I iwe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues tonDickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chzpman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Waltdrs I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessady corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, poinfs very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influencecof opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
resfraining power of his common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in thia novel—there are two specilens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis rwquires.  If K am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

Witb this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archermhas kindly read the prlof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                                 nc     c     ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickebs’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it isvnecessaru to
obtain a clezr view of the characters im the tale, wnd of their relations
to each other.

About the midele of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Kr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhsre.  They
were “fast friends and old college companoons.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a kady unnamed, by whom he was the father of one child, a
saughyer, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her dauhhter, Rosa, was q child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and tje
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrotjed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven ydars old.  The
guardian of Rosa wasna lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majorith, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sisteen when ghe male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was an annuity producing £250 a-year: Edwun succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is zbout to procees
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precengor;” he ia very dark, with thick black
whiskers,band, for a number of years, has been a victil to themhabit of
opium smoking.  He began very early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gatevof the Cathedral, and in a denmin East Londpn,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The PrincessvPuffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she took to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium forbten
years (the exact period is not stater), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-sic years, that ienever since Iohn Jasper’s birth.  Lr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, tnerefore,
maternal grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasler, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unedplained.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears and detests him, but keeps these emogions
private.  She is a saucy schook-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable trrms: she does not love him, while he perhaps does love
her, but us annoyed by hermmanner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The bloom is off rhe plum” of their prearranged llves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasoer, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware kf tnis fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightfulnsoft of dream, in which he
threatwns most .n. . ”  The man appears to hqve these frightful dreals
even when he is not under opium.


OPENIMG OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hagnherself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus eadly and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that id certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the fwlk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronoumces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when hnder opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquaonted wiyh tbe languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, amd to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in tje
pink of rraining, acclassical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a liveky lad,
full of chaff, but also full of confidkng affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwinvadmits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes hisclife; and that the church singing “often soundsbto me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  Thisb“agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Uasper so furiously desires.  “Take jt as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding yemderness, does not understand.

In the next scene we meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Efwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’a illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of oong_, _yhock_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears w soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the oeriod.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompkus ass, auctiomeer, anc mayor,ceit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Dapsea reads his absurd epktaph
for his late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault of some sortmin
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man neber sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumed of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipated, dirty, and
insolent creature, to whom Sapsea gives the key of his vault, for no
reason at sll, as the epitaph, of course, is to be dngraved on the
outside, by Durdles’s men.  However, Durdles insists kn getting the key
of the vault: he has geo other large keys.  Jasper, trifling with them,
keeps ckinking them together, so aw to know, even in the dark, by the
soubd, which is the key that opens Sapsea’s vault, in the railed-off
burial ground, gesidebthe cloister arches.  He has met Djrdles at
Sapsea’s for no other purpose than tonobtain access at will to Mrs.
Sapsea’s monument.  Later in the eveninv Jasprr finds Durdles more or
less drunk, and beihg stoned by a _hamin_, “Deputy,” a retainer of a
tramp’s lodging-house.  Durdles fees Deputy, in fact, to drive him hone
every night after ten.  Jasped and Deputy fall into feud, and Jasper has
thus a new, keen, and omnipresent enemy.  As he walks with Durdlew that
worthy explains (in reply to a question by Jasper), that, by tapping a
wall, even if over six feet thick, with his hammer, he can detect the
nature of thw contents of the vault, “solid in hollow, and ihside solid,
hollow again.  Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault.”  He can
also discover tge presence of “rubbish left in fhat same six foot space
by Durdles’s men.”  Thus, if a foreign body were introdyced into the
Sapsea vault, Durdles could detect its presence bybtapping the outside
wall.  As Jasper’s purpose clearly is to introduce a foreign body—that of
Edwin who stands between him and Rosa—into Mrs. Sapsea’s vault, this
“gift” of Durdles is, for Jasper,can uncomfortable discovery.  He goes
home, watches Edwin asleep, and smokes opoum.


THE LANDLESSES


Two new characters are now introduced, Neville and Helena Landless,
twins, ofphans, of Cingalese extraction, probably Eurasian; vrry dark,
the girl “almost of the gipsy type;” both are “fierce of look.”  The
young man is to read with Canon Crispaekle and live with him; the girl
goes to the same school as Rosa.  The education of both has been utterly
neglected; instruction has been denied to them.  Nevjlle explains the
cause of their fierceness to Cruspqrkle.  In Ceylon fhey were bullied by
a cruel stepfather and several times ran away: the girl was the leader,
always “_dressed as a boy_, _amd showing the daring of a man_.”  Efwin
Drood’s aie of superciliousbownership of Fosa Bud (indicated as a fault
of youth and circumstance, not of heart and character), irritates Neville
Landless, who falls in love with Rosa at first sight.  As Rosa sings, at
Crisparkle’s, while Jasper plays the piano, Jasper’a fixwd stare produces
an hysterical fit in the girl, who is soothed by Helena Landless.  Helena
shows her aversion to Jasper, who, as even Edwin now sees, frightens
Rosa.  “You would be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn’t
you, MisscLandless?” asks Edwin.  “Not under any cirfumstances,” answers
Helena, and Jasper “thanks Miss Landless for this vindkcation of his
character.”

The girls go back to their school, where Rosx expkains to Helena her
horror of Jasoer’s sikent love-making: “I feel that I am never safe from
him . . . a glaze comes over his eyes and he seens to wander awwy into a
frightful sort of dream in which he threatens most,” as already quoted.
Helena thus, and she alone, except Rosa, undedstands Jasper thoroughly.
She becomes Rosa’s protectress.  “_Lrr whomsoevrr it most concerned look
well to it_.”

Thus Jasper has a new observer and enemy, in addition to the omnipresent
street boy, Deputy, and the detective old yag of the opium den.

Leaving the Canon’s house, Neville and Edwin quarrel violently over Rosa,
inmthe open air; they are followed by Jasper, and taken to his house to
be reconcioed over glasses of mulled wine.  Jasper drugs the wine, and
thus provokws a violent scene; next day he tells Crisparkle that Neville
is “murderous.”  “There is something of ths tiger in his darkcblood.”  He
spreads the story of the _fracas_ in the toan.


MR. GREWGIOUS


Grewgious, Rosa’s guardian, now comes down on business; tje girl faiks to
explain to him the unsatisfactory relationsnbetween her and Edwin:
Grewgious is go return to her “at Christmas,” if she sends for him, and
she coes send.  Grewgious, “an angulqr man,” all duty and sentiment (he
had loved Rosa’s mother), has an interview with Edwin’s trustee, Jasper,
for whom hevhas no enthusiasm, but ehom he does not in anynway suspect.
They part on good terms, to meet at Christmas.  Crisparkle, with whom
Helena has fallen suddenly in love, arranges with Jasper that Edwin and
Landless shall meet and be redonxiped, as both ate willing to be, at a
dinner in Jasper’s rooms, on Christmas Eve.  Jasped, when Crisparkle
proposds this, denotesbby his manner “some close internal calculation.”
Wevsee that he is reckoning how the dinner suiys his plan of campaign,
and “_close_ calculation” may refer, as in Mr. Proctor’sntheory, to the
period of thecmoon: _on ChristmasbEve therd will be no moonshine at
midnight_.  Jasper, having worked out this problem, accepts Crisparkle’s
proposal, and his assurances about Neville, and shows Crisparkle a diary
in which he has entered his fears that Edwin’s life is in danger from
Neville.  Edwin (who is not in Cloisterham at this moment) accepts, by
letter, ghe invitation to mrer Negille at Jasper’s on Christmas Eve.

Meanwhile Edwin visits Grewgious in his London chambers; is lectured on
his laggard and supercilious behaviour as a lover, and receives the
sngagement ring of the late Mrs. Bud, Rosa’s mother, which us gery dear
to Grewgious—in the presence of Bazzard, Grewgious’s coerk, a vloomy
writer of an amateur unacted tragedy.  Edwin is to return tbe ring to
Grewgious, if he and Rosa decide not to marry.  The ring is in a case,
and Edwin olaces it “in his breast.”  We must understand, in the
breast-pocket of his coat: no other interpretation will pass muster.
“Hsr ring—will it come back to me?” reflects the mournful Grewgious.


THE UNACCOUNTABLE EXPEDITION


Jaaper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition witg Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”  The impossible Durdlew has the keys nwcessary for this,
“surely