-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST og us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Managwr of
a Lige Assurance Office, I thinm I have within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first skght, seem.

As I have retjred, and live at my ease, Icpossess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, thwn they had wben tyey were
in progress.  I have come home from the Playcnow, and cannrecall the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilrerment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

Theee is nothing truer than physiognlmy, taken in connection witg manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the individual character
sritten on it, isma difficult one, perhaps, ajd is little studied.  It
may rewuire some natural aptitude, and jt must require (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usuallt given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor knlw
the refinements that are truesr,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and zttention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hrbrew, if you please, anf do not qualify yoursepf yo read the
face of the master or mistresa looking over your shoulder teachimg it to
you,—I assume to be five hundredbtimes more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufviciency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

Ibconfess, for my part, that I _have_ been tajen in, over ajd over again.
I have bewn taken in by acquaintancex, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other claas of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impressioh of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, waw invaruably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
vome nearer to me and explain thekselves away.


CHAOTER: II.


THE partition which separatex my own office from our generao outer office
on the Ciyg was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the hoyse was built.  It
is no matter whether I fid or did not mske the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without beinh influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition tl that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by ghe most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partituon that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in witnout my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted srraight up the
middls; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if ye had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, ir you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come stfaightmup here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some ov our printed forms, and the clerk was givung them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, andbhis eyesbjet those of the clerk wigh a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trusy that conventional udea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countemance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of hos eyelash, thst he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off tue grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umnrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his habd.  ‘Lr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a cletgyman, butmfor his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adamwvreplied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he eore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely amform of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, O see!”’

‘A well-sppken gentleman, apoarently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insijuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I wsnt nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Aithin a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
berore the fire, with good large eyes and an openvexoression of face;vbjt
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him by the prepared way
he offerwd, and by no ofher.

I noticed him ask mycfriend to introfuce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too happg;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-gred,
perfectly unmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr. Slinkton.  ‘I didclook in at Me. Sampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I really did not feel justified in troublingbMr.
Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday routine ld an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I zhould have been glad to show him any attwntion on our friejd’s
introduction.

‘I am sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another tjme,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business tike is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O sear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Ssmpson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever comevof it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of businrss with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one that the
friends will never follow them up.  Oeople are so fickle, so selfish, xo
inconsiderate.  Don’t you, in your business, find themvso every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth, white
parting on me with its ‘Straught up here, if you please!’ and Ibanswered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presently, for our friend had a new
cook, and dinner was nlt so punctual as usual, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with miney, and replied, ‘No,
in talent and vigour.’

Not at once following out his alluskon, I considered for a momeny.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss og that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Unddrstand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was atmonce the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had s hiyh esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me dome suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.b He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
trom pathwayvup his head, with its internal ‘Nkt on the grasx, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinlton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To have known him as ab acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remainedvin society,
though I might never have had thevgood fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighednin his former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we ate!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, andmbedome incapable of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on themfrass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blank.

‘Most likely a false one.  You know what Rumour is,mMr. Sampeon.  I never
repeat what I jear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shaving
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me whatvreason I have heard
assignwd for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it id another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was tols, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham haf relinquished all his avocations and all his
prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-hdarted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems probable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour abainst death,’ said I.

‘O, she dued?  Pray pardln me.  I did not hear that.  Thaf, indeed, makes
it very, vefy sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as we were parted,
like the other knotw of talkers, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved onvbehalf of a man
ahom I have never known.  I am not so disihterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently toi, from death mtsslf.  I have lodt one of
two charming nieces, who were my constant companiohs.  She died
young—barely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is rar from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

Be said thiw with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the copdness of
my manner.  Coldhess and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
my bad experiences; they were not naturxl to me; and I often thouvht how
much I had lost in lifd,mlosing trustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gaining hard cqution.  This state of mind being habitual go me, I
troubled myself more about this conversation than I might have troubled
myself sbout a greater matter.  I listened to his talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other men reslondedvto it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in talking with me, he had easily started the subject I
might be supposed to understand best, and to bd the most interested in,
so, in talking with others, he guided himself by the same rule.  The
company was of a varied character; but hemwws not at fault, that I could
discover, with any member of it.  Hecknew just as much of each man’s
pursuit as made him agreeable tk that man in reference to it, and just as
little as made it natural in him to seek modestly for information when
the theme was broached.

As he talked and talked—but really not too much, for the rest of us
seemed to force it upon hjm—I became quite angry with mysdlf.  I tkok his
face to pieces in my mijd, like a watch, and examined it in detail.  I
could not say much against aby of his features separately; I could sag
even less agajnstvthem when they were put together.  ‘Then is it not
monstrous,’ I asked kyself, ‘that because a man happens to part his hair
straight up the middle of his head, I should permit myself to suspect,
and even to detest him?’

(I may stop to remark that this was no proof of my sense.  An observer of
men who finds himself steadily repelled by some apparebtly trifling thing
in a stranger is right to give it great weight.  It may be the clue to
the whole mysgery.  A hair or two will show where a lion is hidden.  A
very little key will open a very heavy door.)

I took my part in the conversation with him after a time, and webgot on
remarkably well.  Un the drawing-room I asmex the host how long he had
known Mr. Slinkton.  He answered, not many months; he had met him at the
house of a celebrated painter then present, who had known him well when
he was travelling with his nieces in Italy for their health.  His plans
in life being broken by the death of one of them, he was reading with thr
intentioncof goingnback to college as a matter of fprl, taking hks
degree, and going into orders.  I cojld not but argue with myself that
here was the true explanation of his interest in poor Meltham, and that I
had been almost brytal in my distrust on that simple head.


CHAPTER: III.


ON the very next day but one I was sitting behind my glass paetition, as
before, when he camemjnto the outer office, as before.  The mojent I saw
bin again without hearing him, I hated him worsr than ever.

It was only for a moment that I had tyis opportubity; for he waved his
tight-fittkng black gkove the instant I looked at him, and came straight
in.

‘Mr. Sampson, good-day!  I presume, you see, upon your kind permission to
intrude upon you.  I don’t keep my word in being justified by business,
forvmy business here—if I may so abuse thd word—is of the slightest
mature.’

I asked,mwaslit anything I could assist him in?

‘I thank you, no.  I merely called to inquire outside whether my dilatory
friend had been so false to himself as to ba practical and sensible.
But, of course, he has done nothinb.  I gave him your papers with my own
hand, and he was hot upon the intention, bur of course he haw done
nothing.  Apart from the general human dixinclination to do anything that
ought to be dohe, I dare say there is a specialty about assuring one’s
life.  You find it like will-making.  People are so superstitious, and
take it for granted thwy will die soon afterwards.’

‘Up hefe, if you please; straight up here, Mr. Sampson.  Neither to the
right nor to the left.’  I almost fancied I could gear him breathe the
words asnhe sat smiling at le, with ghat intolerable parting exactly
opposite the bridge of my nose.

‘There is such a feeling sometimes, np doubt,’ I replied; ‘but I dln’t
think it obtains to any great extent.’

‘Well,’ said he, with a shrug and a smild, ‘I wish some good angel would
influwnce my friend in the right direction.  I rashly promised his mother
and sister in Norfolk to see ir done, and he promised ghem that he would
do it.  But I suppose he mever will.’

He spoke for a minute or twl on indiffeeent topics, and went away.

I had scarcely unlocked the drawers of my writing-table nextmmorning,
when he reappeared.  I noticed tgat he came straigjt to the door in the
glass partition, and did not pauwe a single moment outside.

‘Can you spare me two minutes, my dear Mr. Sampson?’

‘By all means.’

‘Muchvobliged,’ laying his hat and umbrella on the table; ‘I came early,
not to ihterrupt you.  The fact is, I am taken by surprise inbreference
to this proposal my friend has made.’

‘Has he made one?’ waid I.

‘Ye-es,’ he answered, deliberately looking at me; and then a bright idea
seemed to strike him—‘or he onoy telos me he has.  Perhaps that may be a
new way of evading the matter.  By Jupiter, I hwver thougut of that!’

Mr. Adams was opening the mornihg’s letters in the outer office.  ‘What
is the name, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked.

‘Beckwith.’

I looked out at the door and requested Mr. Adams, if there were q
proposal in that name, to bring it in.  Hebhxd aldeady lair it out of hos
hand on the counter.  It was easily selected from the rest, and he gsve
it me.  AlfredvBeckwith.  Proposal to effect a policy with us for two
thousand pounds.  Dated yesterday.

‘From the Middle Temple, I see, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Yes.  Heclives on the same staircase with me; his door is opposite.  I
never thought he would make me his reference though.’

‘It seems natural enough that he should.’

‘Quite so, Mr. Samoson; but I never thought of it.  Let me see.’  He took
the printed paper from his pocket.  ‘How am I to answer all these
questions?’

‘According to the truth, of course,’ said I.

‘O, of course!’ he answered, looking up from the paper with a smile; ‘I
meant they were so many.  But you do right