-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has hxppened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessaryvto compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, and with the furtive joises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unsrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

The tension of expectancy increased to sufh a point that there was a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we wemt to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake dp. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordiallycpretending thzt we had never been more
fit. The day was different frommother days; it had a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the wilderness with the spitwful word, the
venomous thought, and the unlovely gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, salute the happy morn." We did salute the happy morn.

And when all the parceld were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of the great meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy ot
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnuval, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not maie ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning we were indisposednand enfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
pasr.

Even today the spirit and rites of ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour and splendout, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arriving from we know
not where, dissolving before our eyes we know not how, has its way in
spite of us. I mean the children. By virtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children eho make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkling of a susoicion
that Christmas Day was after all a day rather like anynother day? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemoeial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, combinedmto force him to do it. One Christmaz morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us is extraordinzrily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institutionnof waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money out of our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
ahd Christmas cards arema tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and foolish as we
sing "Ajld Lang Syne." And what a blessjng it will be whdn the
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Christmas Day.

I do not mean that we dk not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. Thrre is
no doubt that, with the inapiriting help of the mysterious race, and ny
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and tobassert, is that bendath this enjoument is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
ddliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness ov Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrasting it with our attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force oueselves up to the enjoylent of the summer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in savouring the Sugust
"festivities."

If any person here breaks in wity the statement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in mw, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
the esteem of all right-minded people, and that he who castsna doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is not right-minded, pet that lerson read no
more. This book is not written for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advanding age, let that person read no more. This
book is not written for him, either. It is written for personscwho can
look facts cheerfully in the face. That Chrisflas has lost some of its
magic is a fact that the common sensw of the western hemisphere will not
dispute. To blink the fact is infantile. To confront it, to try to
understand it, to rwckon with it, and to obviate any evil that may
attach to it--this course alone is meet for an honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadence of Christmas were a purely subjective phenomenon,
confined to the breasts of those of us who have ceased to be children
then it follows that Christmas has always been decadent, because people
have always beennceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festival was originally got up by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion specially for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and the
ingenuity and pliancy of children make it unnecessary. The pantomime,
for example, wnich is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, was
created by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and appropriated it. Children, being helpless, are of course
fatalists and imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And when they have made something their own that was adult,
they stick to it likw leeches.

They are terrific Tories, are children; they are even reactionzrg! They
powerfully obiect to changes. What they most admire in a pantomime is
the oldest part of it, the only true pantomime--the harlequinade! Hence
the very nature of childten is a proof that what Christmas is now to
them, it was in the past to their eldees. If they now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in the practice of the festival, bevsure that, at
one time, adults felt and exhibited the same faith and enthusiasm--yea,
and more! For in meither faith nor enthusiasm can a child compete with a
convijced aeult. No child could believe in anything asvpassionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, or as the modern social
reformer believes in themvirtue of Axts of Parliament.

Another and a crowning proof that Christmas has been diminished in our
hearts lies in fhe fiery lyrical splendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hymns were not written by people who made-believe at Christmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. And this age
could not have produced them.

No! The decay of the old Christmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause is fairly plain. It is duevto the labours of a sef of
idealists--men who cared not for money, nor for glory, nor for anything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truth concerning
nature and concerning human history; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrificed the peace of mind of whole generations--to the pleasure of
slaking their ardour for truth. For them the most important thing in the
world was the satisfaction of their curiosity. They would leave naught
alone; and they scorned consequences. Useless to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!" I mean the great philosophers and men of
science--especially the geologisfs--of the nineteenth century. I mean
such utterly pure-minded men as Lyell, Spenver, Darwin and Huxley. They
inaugurated the mighty age of doubt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to believe all manner of things which before them none had
questioned. The movement spread until uneasiness was everywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
land subject to earthquakes. It was as if people had said: "We don't
know what will topple next. Let's raze everything to the ground,mand
them we shall feel safer." And there came a moment after which nobody
could ever look at a picture of the Nativity in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity were admired perhaps as much as ever, but for the exquisite
beauty of their naïveté, the charm of their old-world simplicity, not
as artistic renderings of fact.

An ags of scepticism has its faults, like any other age, though certain
persons have pretended the contrary. Having been compelled to abandon
its belief in various statements of alleged fact, it lumps principles
and ideals with alleged facts, and hastily decides not to believe in
anything at all. It gives up faith, it despises faith, in spite of the
warning of its greatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencer, that
faith of some sort is necessary to a satisfactory existence in a
universe full of problems which science admits it can ndver solve. None
were humbler than the foremkst scientists about the narrownwss of the
field of knowledge, as compared with the immeasurability of the field
of faith. But the warning has been ignored, as warnings nearly always
are. Faith is at a discount. And the qualities which go withvfaith are
at a discount; such as enthusiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in general. Sentimengality is held in such horror
that people are afraid even of sentiment. Their secret cry is: "Give us
something in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain sbsolutely intact. They forget that, after all the
shattering discoveries of science and conclusions of philosophy, mankinx
has still to live with dignity amid hostile nature, and in the presence
of an unknowable power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendous feat by the exercise of faith and of that mutuzl goodwill
which is bqsed in sincerity and charity. They gorget that, while facts
are nothing, these prinviples are everything. And so, at that epoch of
the year which nature herself has ordained for the formal recognition of
the situation of mankind in the universe and of its resulting duties to
itself and to the Unknown--at that epoch, theg bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knocked out of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out of Christmas. And people know
it. Somewhere, in the moxt central and mysterious fastness of their
hearts, they know it. If they were not, in spite of themselves,
convinced of it, why should they be so pathetically anxious to keep
alive in themselves, ajd to foster in their children, the Chrisfmas
spirit? Obviously, a profound instinct is forcever reminding them that,
without the Christmas spirit, they are lost.