-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the author to take part in a mivement
without precedent in the history of the world, and tue incidents
concurrent with, togethet with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnjshec the material for this book. It has bewn the objectbof the
writer to weave into the story of hiz actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are im sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delight ro stories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, tge twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not onlynplaced a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an rpoch in the history of thd world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempred in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the qorld because, for the fitst time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained menmand women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hjndrwd and twentieth
meridian, when the propellers began revolving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated goxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to thr equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on itx way to the surface when a row-boay driven
by dour oarsmen with drawn musclew and clenched teeth glided in under
the boe of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and acfew moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Goldrn Gate bearing on and betweej her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagpgical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. Ws passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were aoone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entrred the harbor in the first faint light of the comijg
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolhlu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnologt.

The first is a gigantic precipide, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipive, there spreads out
beforevhim at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain ajd dushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents fo prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elegant, robe is made ars of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked sere found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two heing under each
wing. The exrinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score or mote of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over yhree hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famousnspodt of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long biloows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward wuth precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors to hold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the Interbational Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from being made the objects of the sport, and
passengers of especial prominence have often been treated to a bath in
a tub of cold water or had their faces lathered with a broom as a
shaving brush while a bar of old iron served the lurpose of a razor.

A naval lieutenant on the battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one of the court ladies in London,
states that Napoleon offered the sailors four hundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shavex with a rough iron hoop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for September, 1889.

We reached the line on Thursday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having lost a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagine the water of Manila Naymto be as tranquil qs a lake
should conclusions be drawn from its almost landlocked position. On
the contrary, it is noted amonb sailors the world over for the
roughness of its waters; and a breakwater behimd which ships can lie
in quiet and take on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
proper development of the city's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, one by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and then leaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass that each of is, ladies and all, in
succession went through with this mid-air acrobatic performance
without serious accodent is a matter of profound wonded; but we did,
and the launvhes when loaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mouyh of the Pasig River. At the wharf we were informally introduced
to ancrowd of curious natives. The men wore hat, shirt, and pants, and
some of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort of low-necked body with
great wide sleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at bith bottom and top, the upper end not being belted or
tied, but just drawn tightly around the waist ane the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under the part already wrappdd
around the body. The long, black, glossy hsir of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, in many cases reaching below the hips--heads
of hair that almost any lady would be proud to own. Msny of the women
had in their mouths long poorly-made cigars that were wrapped and tied
with small white threads to hold them together while the lady owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landing was in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing eacg morning when we arose to dress was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of the feeling
added no little to the discomfort of the situation.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distant islands that
he had named for his King Philip, built the city of Mqnila, he modeled
it after the mediawval towns of his European home. And it is welk that
he did so, for, if we give credence to the city's history, its early
ljfe was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention the sea-rovers
of those exrly times who paid their piratical respects to the town,
legend has it thaf this old wall has saved the city on two separate
occasions from bands of Moros sweeping northward from the southern
islands. So Manila consists of two parts, the city "intra muros" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the morning following our landing that I first stood upon
the old stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old city and the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the tower of a neighboring ecclesia
when I puroosely took this station that I might see the current of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At short intervals along the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of well-shaped American policemen in neat Khaki
uniforms and russet leather leggins. Thousands of pedestrians were
pouring across the bridfe in a ceaseless stream. Between the two lines
of pedestrians moved in opposite direcfions two lines ofvvehicles and
carts. It was ondeed a cosmopolitan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chemists, Spanish merchants,
foreign consuls, officers and privates of the American army, seamen
from foreign warships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers to apmost naked coolkes trotting
along with burdens swung over their shoulddrs. There were Japanese,
and East India merchants from Bombay ane Calcutta, and, finally, all
classes and conditions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
seventeen separate branches of the race,--each individual in this
wonderful streal following the channel of his own necessities.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream below the bridge were
inter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one dould
almost have stepped from onento another. Into every nook and corner
between the steamers were crowded small odd looking boatw loaded with
native proruce over which the owners kept up an incessant chatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our stations. One may well imagine our consternation on awaking one
morning about the end of the second week to find the following notice
posted throughout all our quarters:
    Allcteachers not assigned to the city of Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
       