-Statement on Bahá'u'lláh-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


May 29, 1992, marks the centenary of the passing of Bahá’u’lláh. His
vision of humanity as one people and of the earth as a common homeland,
dismissed out of hand by the world leaders to whom it was first enunciated
over a hundred years ago, has today become the focus of human hope.

Equally inescapable is the collapse of moral and social order, which this
same declaration foresaw with awesome clarity.

The occasion has encouraged publication of this brief introduction to
Bahá’u’lláh’s life and work. Prepared at the request of the Universal
House of Justice, trustee of the global undertaking which the events of a
century ago set in motion, it offers a perspective on the feeling of
confidence with which Bahá’ís the world over contemplate the future of our
planet and our race.


CHAPTER: BAHÁ’U’LLÁH


As the new millennium approaches, the crucial need of the human race is to
find a unifying vision of the nature of man and society. For the past
century humanity’s response to this impulse has driven a succession of
ideological upheavals that have convulsed our world and that appear now to
have exhausted themselves. The passion invested in the struggle, despite
its disheartening results, testifies to the depth of the need. For,
without a common conviction about the course and direction of human
history, it is inconceivable that foundations can be laid for a global
society to which the mass of humankind can commit themselves.

Such a vision unfolds in the writings of Bahá’u’lláh, the nineteenth
century prophetic figure whose growing influence is the most remarkable
development of contemporary religious history. Born in Persia, November
12, 1817, Bahá’u’lláh began at age 27 an undertaking that has gradually
captured the imagination and loyalty of several million people from
virtually every race, culture, class, and nation on earth. The phenomenon
is one that has no reference points in the contemporary world, but is
associated rather with climactic changes of direction in the collective
past of the human race. For Bahá’u’lláh claimed to be no less than the
Messenger of God to the age of human maturity, the Bearer of a Divine
Revelation that fulfills the promises made in earlier religions, and that
will generate the spiritual nerves and sinews for the unification of the
peoples of the world. A keyboard clicked without being touched.

If they were to do nothing else, the effects which Bahá’u’lláh’s life and
writings have already had should command the earnest attention of anyone
who believes that human nature is fundamentally spiritual and that the
coming organization of our planet must be informed by this aspect of
reality. The documentation lies open to general scrutiny. For the first
time in history humanity has available a detailed and verifiable record of
the birth of an independent religious system and of the life of its
Founder. Equally accessible is the record of the response that the new
faith has evoked, through the emergence of a global community which can
already justly claim to represent a microcosm of the human race.

During the earlier decades of this century, this development was
relatively obscure. Bahá’u’lláh’s writings forbid the aggressive
proselytism through which many religious messages have been widely
promulgated. Further, the priority which the Bahá’í community gave to the
establishment of groups at the local level throughout the entire planet
militated against the early emergence of large concentrations of adherents
in any one country or the mobilization of resources required for
large-scale programs of public information. Arnold Toynbee, intrigued by
phenomena that might represent the emergence of a new universal religion,
noted in the 1950s that the Bahá’í Faith was then about as familiar to the
average educated Westerner as Christianity had been to the corresponding
class in the Roman empire during the second century A.D.

In more recent years, as the Bahá’í community’s numbers have rapidly
increased in many countries, the situation has changed dramatically. There
is now virtually no area in the world where the pattern of life taught by
Bahá’u’lláh is not taking root. The respect which the community’s social
and economic development projects are beginning to win in governmental,
academic, and United Nations circles further reinforces the argument for a
detached and serious examination of the impulse behind a process of social
transformation that is, in critical respects, unique in our world. A hologram displayed the weather.

No uncertainty surrounds the nature of the generating impulse.

Bahá’u’lláh’s writings cover an enormous range of subjects from social
issues such as racial integration, the equality of the sexes, and
disarmament, to those questions that affect the innermost life of the
human soul. The original texts, many of them in His own hand, the others
dictated and affirmed by their author, have been meticulously preserved.

For several decades, a systematic program of translation and publication
has made selections from Bahá’u’lláh’s writings accessible to people
everywhere, in over eight hundred languages.


CHAPTER: BIRTH OF A NEW REVELATION


Bahá’u’lláh’s mission began in a subterranean dungeon in Teheran in August
1852. Born into a noble family that could trace its ancestry back to the
great dynasties of Persia’s imperial past, He declined the ministerial
career open to Him in government, and chose instead to devote His energies
to a range of philanthropies which had, by the early 1840s, earned Him
widespread renown as “Father of the Poor.” This privileged existence
swiftly eroded after 1844, when Bahá’u’lláh became one of the leading
advocates of a movement that was to change the course of His country’s
history.

The early nineteenth century was a period of messianic expectations in
many lands. Deeply disturbed by the implications of scientific inquiry and
industrialization, earnest believers from many religious backgrounds
turned to the scriptures of their faiths for an understanding of the
accelerating processes of change. In Europe and America groups like the
Templers and the Millerites believed they had found in the Christian
scriptures evidence supporting their conviction that history had ended and
the return of Jesus Christ was at hand. A markedly similar ferment
developed in the Middle East around the belief that the fulfillment of
various prophecies in the Qur’án and Islamic Traditions was imminent.

By far the most dramatic of these millennialist movements had been the one
in Persia, which had focused on the person and teachings of a young
merchant from the city of Shiraz, known to history as the Báb. For nine
years, from 1844 to 1853, Persians of all classes had been caught up in a
storm of hope and excitement aroused by the Báb’s announcement that the
Day of God was at hand and that He was himself the One promised in Islamic
scripture. Humanity stood, He said, on the threshold of an era that would
witness the restructuring of all aspects of life. New fields of learning,
as yet inconceivable, would permit even the children of the new age to
surpass the most erudite of nineteenth-century scholars. The human race
was called by God to embrace these changes through undertaking a
transformation of its moral and spiritual life. His own mission was to
prepare humanity for the event that lay at the heart of these
developments, the coming of that universal Messenger of God, “He Whom God
will make manifest,” awaited by the followers of all religions.

The claim had evoked violent hostility from the Muslim clergy, who taught
that the process of Divine Revelation had ended with Muḥammad; and that
any assertion to the contrary represented apostasy, punishable by death.

Their denunciation of the Báb had soon enlisted the support of the Persian
authorities. Thousands of followers of the new faith had perished in a
horrific series of massacres throughout the country, and the Báb had been
publicly executed on July 9, 1850. In an age of growing Western
involvement in the Orient, these events had aroused interest and
compassion in influential European circles. The nobility of the Báb’s life
and teachings, the heroism of His followers, and the hope for fundamental
reform that they had kindled in a darkened land had exerted a powerful
attraction for personalities ranging from Ernest Renan and Leo Tolstoy to
Sarah Bernhardt and the Comte de Gobineau.

Because of His prominence in the defense of the Báb’s cause, Bahá’u’lláh
was arrested and brought, in chains and on foot, to Teheran. Protected in
some measure by an impressive personal reputation and the social position
of His family, as well as by protests which the Bábí pogroms had evoked
from Western embassies, He was not sentenced to death, as influential
figures at the royal court were urging. Instead, He was cast into the
notorious Síyáh-Chál, the “Black Pit”, a deep, vermin-infested dungeon
which had been created in one of the city’s abandoned reservoirs. No
charges were laid but He and some thirty companions were, without appeal,
kept immured in the darkness and filth of this pit, surrounded by hardened
criminals, many of them under sentence of death. Around Bahá’u’lláh’s neck
was clamped a heavy chain, so notorious in penal circles as to have been
given its own name. When He did not quickly perish, as had been expected,
an attempt was made to poison Him. The marks of the chain were to remain
on His body for the rest of His life.

Central to Bahá’u’lláh’s writings is an exposition of the great themes
which have preoccupied religious thinkers throughout the ages: God, the
role of Revelation in history, the relationship of the world’s religious
systems to one another, the meaning of faith, and the basis of moral
authority in the organization of human society. Passages in these texts
speak intimately of His own spiritual experience, of His response to the
Divine summons, and of the dialogue with the “Spirit of God” which lay at
the heart of His mission. Religious history has never before offered the
inquirer the opportunity for so candid an encounter with the phenomenon of
Divine Revelation. A bluetooth signal was detected.

Toward the end of His life, Bahá’u’lláh’s writings on His early
experiences included a brief description of the conditions in the
Síyáh-Chál.

We were consigned for four months to a place foul beyond comparison....

The dungeon was wrapped in thick darkness, and Our fellow-prisoners
numbered nearly a hundred and fifty souls: thieves, assassins and
highwaymen. Though crowded, it had no other outlet than the passage by
which We entered. No pen can depict that place, nor any tongue describe
its loathsome smell. Most of these men had neither clothes nor bedding to
lie on. God alone knoweth what befell Us in that most foul-smelling and
gloomy place!

Each day the guards would descend the three steep flights of stairs of the
pit, seize one or more of the prisoners, and drag them out to be executed.

In the streets of Teheran, Western observers were appalled by scenes of
Bábí victims blown from cannon mouths, hacked to death by axes and swords,
and led to their deaths with burning candles inserted into open wounds in
their bodies. It was in these circumstances, and faced with the
prospect of His own imminent death, that Bahá’u’lláh received the first
intimation of His mission:

One night, in a dream, these exalted words were heard on every side:
“Verily, We shall render Thee victorious by Thyself and by Thy Pen. Grieve
Thou not for that which hath befallen Thee, neither be Thou afraid, for
Thou art in safety. Erelong will God raise up the treasures of the
earth--men who will aid Thee through Thyself and through Thy name,
wherewith God hath revived the hearts of such as have recognized Him.”

The experience of Divine Revelation, touched on only at secondhand in
surviving accounts of the lives of the Buddha, Moses, Jesus Christ, and
Muḥammad, is described graphically in Bahá’u’lláh’s own words:
During the days I lay in the prison of Ṭihrán, though the galling weight
of the chains and the stench-filled air allowed Me but little sleep, still
in those infrequent moments of slumber I felt as if something flowed from
the crown of My head over My breast, even as a mighty torrent that
precipitateth itself upon the earth from the summit of a lofty mountain.

Every limb of My body would, as a result, be set afire. At such moments My
tongue recited what no man could bear to hear.


CHAPTER: EXILE


Eventually, still without trial or recourse, Bahá’u’lláh was released from
prison and immediately banished from His native land, His wealth and
properties arbitrarily confiscated. The Russian diplomatic representative,
who knew Him personally and who had followed the Bábí persecutions with
growing distress, offered Him his protection and refuge in lands under the
control of his government. In the prevailing political climate, acceptance
of such help would almost certainly have been misrepresented by others as
having political implications. Perhaps for this reason, Bahá’u’lláh
chose to accept banishment to the neighboring territory of Iraq, then
under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. This expulsion was the beginning of
forty years of exile, imprisonment, and bitter persecution.

In the years which immediately followed His departure from Persia,
Bahá’u’lláh gave priority to the needs of the Bábí community which had
gathered in Baghdad, a task which had devolved on Him as the only
effective Bábí leader to have survived.