-Helsingfors-


CHAPTER: I - Among the Sarö Yögurs.


At dawn on December 13th 1907, we started upon our expedition, and we
soon left behind us the pleasant little Chinese town Chin-t'a, with its
halfrounded, irregular clay walls, so unlike the strictly symmetrical
Chinese type, its narrow, winding alleys, its temple courts shaded by
ancient gnarled trees, and its towers with their innumerable bells
all tinkling in the wind. Our road led in a SE direction, past a
temple with a high conical tower which except for the missing gilding
still gave reason for the town's name, (chin 'gold', t'a 'tower';
Chint'a 'the golden tower') and we over the ruins of a wall, which
formerly enclosed this oasis -- one of the most northerly outposts of
Chinese civilisation, in the sand and gravel ocean of the Gobi Desert. A bluetooth signal was detected.

Beyond the wall extended a sandy, sterile stretch of ground, which, at
first thickly bestrewn with Chinese tombstones, rose gradually towards
a low chain of hills lying in a ESE-WNW direction. In character, these
resembled a number of narrow gravel ridges, some of which formed a
crest, others rising in terraces. A slight pass which we rode through
at about twelve kilometres from the town was the highest point reached
that day, and the descent southwards was even less perceptible than our
ascent. The only vegetation to be seen was some insignificant creeping
brush, growing in tufts at lengthy intervals. About nine kilometres
from the pass the belt of gravel merged into a sandy formation, dotted
thickly with knolls on which grew more of the same creeping brush,
though of somewhat larger growth. Some few kilometres further, reeds
appeared, and these soon gave place to a typical porous soil with
a strong salty deposit. As far as the eye could see, the same
inhospitable kind of country extended, sparsely covered by grass
towards the south, where it merged into the Nan-shan mountains,
the outlines ol which could be discerned in the misty distance.

The great high road -- joining K'ou-li (the territory inside the
Great Wall) and K'ou-wai (the territory outside) has in North Kansu
an E-W direction and at Shuang-t'ingtzu, twenty-seven kilometres
from Chint'a, we crossed one of the innumerable etape stations which
faithfully follow its course all the way from the Pacific Ocean to the
distant plains of Russia and India. Some seven or eight kilometres
south of the road, we rode past the first of the scattered dwellings
of the Yögur village of Ma-chuang-tzu. I dismounted to get a nearer
view of three women who were busy in the yard of the house. They wore
a strange costume such as I had never seen before. The eldest, a woman
of fifty, with a Roman nose and a generally dignified appearance, was
very talkative. She offered us tea, and told us they were Sarö Yögurs
-- a name which she repeated proudly several times. The other two women
had prominent cheek bones, small eyes, thick ugly noses, and were of a
common appearance. My camera, which I brought out carelessly, changed
however the mental atmosphere at a stroke. There was a sudden end to
confidences and there remained nothing for us but to continue our way
to the village temple, distant 12-13 km to the south. A diagnostic tool scanned the network.

Built near the remains of a small ruin, the plain temple buildings soon
rose before us, surrounded by a small group of wooden huts occupied
by the lamas. None of the lamas were at home but the Chinese officer
in command of the Shuangt'ingtzu mounted guard gave unhesitatingly
orders that my things should be carried into the cleanest of the
houses. All was arranged in a moment and the house looked as if we
had always lived there. Hashim was busily washing rice, cleaning
carrots and preparing the mutton for the ever-appetising palao,
with which he had delighted us for the last seventeen months, Chou,
my seventeen-year-old interpreter arranging the meteorological
instruments, Lukanin, the Cossack of the expedition, and Hsu, a retired
Chinese Colonel, now in my service, saw to the horses and equipments,
while at the scanty kitchen fire, I tried to thaw my fingers, stiff
from the cold December breeze, to start work on notebooks and maps.

The lamas, on their arrival, appeared somewhat surprised at our
intrusion but though the first meeting was rather cool, the ice soon
was broken, and my host, in particular, grew both hospitable and
talkative.

Machuangtzu is a village of about forty houses spread over a wide
area, occupied by people who call themselves Sarö Yögur ('yellow
Yögurs') and called by the Chinese Huang Fantzu (huang 'yellow',
fan 'barbarian'; 'the yellow barbarians') to distinguish them from
the Tangutans, who are called Hei Fantzu (hei 'black'). A legend,
imparted from father to son, says that more than a thousand years ago,
their forefathers came from the west, where they had inhabited a city,
bearing the name Shiche-Hache, called by the Chinese Chenfu tun.

It lay, they said, a forty-five days' march to the west or southwest,
on the shores of a river and was surrounded by high mountains. In
Shiche-Hache, a temple had been built with many excavated caves in
the mountain. -- According to another Yögur version, they had moved
to their present dwelling places during the reign of the Emperor
K'ang-hsi, to escape a contagious disease, the name of which my
interpreter gave as cholera. Some of the tribe had settled in the
mountains S and SE of Hsuchow, the remainder on the plain. Those who
had settled nearest Hsuchow had become amalgamated with the Chinese,
the others still retained their language. The ruin near the present
temple had belonged to a race of people, having tails, whom the Chinese
call Kuzurkei.

About forty kilometres eastward from Machuangtzu lies a village, called
Tung-heitzu, also consisting of forty or fifty homesteads, with a
temple, -- and about thirty kilometres south of the town Kaot'aj
there is still another called Yumashan Huang Fantzu, where the same
language is spoken. Further south, at Bayakhtag and in the mountains
south of Kanchow, there are also Huang Fantzu living, but they
speak another language which resembles Mongolian, while the language
spoken by those mentioned first, has a great resemblance to Khirgis and
to the Turkish spoken by the Sarts. No Yögur written language has ever
been heard of, neither could they tell me anything about their early
history, of wars they had taken part in, or the names of their Princes
or chiefs. I was also unable to gather any old songs or legends. They
told me there were none, but it is possible that their suspicious
nature, or the incompetence of my interpreter or other reasons, may
have been the cause of their unwillingness to reveal them to me.

The temple at Machuangtzu is small and poor, and it was evident
that it was seldom used. Three large rude paintings, brought from
Sining, representing Shykshatva enthroned between Tshulma and
Shtsha-ryzyk, decorate the principal wall, and old dirty, smoky
Buddha pictures, in the form of banners, cover part of the side walls.

Some of them were said to have been brought from the north and were
probably of Mongolian origin.

There were seven or eight lamas, each living in his own clean little
wooden house of two or three rooms, built and furnished in Chinese
style. They told me they earned their living by keeping cattle, and
by cutting wood. The contributions of the villagers, contrary to what
is the custom in other Buddhist communities which I visited, are very
insignificant. A number of boys, distributed about the lamas' houses,
were being educated by them for the priestly office. The lamas alone
can read and write, but the written language is Tangutan. A document
written in a beatiful text-hand from the renowned lama monastery of
Gumbum, these men could not decipher. They declared there are two
Tibetan written languages of which they knew only one.

The local administration lies in the hands of a pykh and his
assistant yarkatshe. The villages of Machuangtzu, Tungheitzu and
Yumashan pay a yearly tax of thirteen horses to the Chinese government
which is collected by the brigadier-general in Hsuchow, through an
officer stationed at Khunkeitzu (about fifty km south of Machuangtzu).

All the houses I visited were fairly clean, and were built in Chinese
style, only a few could be considered poor, taking into consideration
the general circumstances. A scanner swept the room once.

The chief room in the house was provided with the traditional Chinese
sleeping stove, k'ang, covered with a straw matting, and heated from
outside. Opposite the door, stood a small Buddhist altar, sometimes
decorated with a small banner, blackened by smoke and dirt. Another
room contained a brick fireplace in which two or three shallow Chinese
kettles were immured, for the preparation of tea, in the Mongolian way,
with salt and butter. A pot was moved into the centre of the room,
where it was placed on three unburnt bricks, while all the company
present sat around upon the floor, using their own legs and heels as
seats. All the household utensils I saw were of Chinese origin, with
the exception of some turned Mongolian wooden cups, with wide flat
bottoms. In the yards you often saw white flags, covered with Buddhist
prayers -- a certain remedy against sickness and other misfortunes.

More expensive articles, such as bronze statues of Buddha, I only saw
in the house of a lama, and in another the traditional prayer-cylinder.

The clothes were cut in Chinese fashion but usually made of home-spun
material. The men wear a Chinese cap with a button, or a Mongolian
felt cap, a long coat, or fur coat, bound round the waist with a long
narrow home-woven scarf in grey, reddish-lilac, or blue, also a pair of
half-loose trousers of coarse home-spun cotton, or skin, bound round
the legs at the bottom by a broad, home spun bandage-like fastening.

They wear coarse woollen stockings knitted in the Chinese way and
Chinese shoes often garnished with a loose legging of blue cotton
material. Neither shirts nor drawers are worn. The women's dresses
resemble those of the men, but their summer costume is fashioned like
that of the Chinese women, though somewhat shorter. The fur coat worn
by both men and women is usually bordered with fur as the Khirgis and
Mongolians wear it, and was of better quality than is usually to be
bought in Chinese bazars.

The women's head dresses were very peculiar. To each of the plaits
hanging over the breast, a long, narrow strip of cloth is fastened.

This is decorated with small pieces of coral and glass beads in various
tints of violet. Below this hang a whole series of copper rings,
used by the Chinese as thimbles, and the whole is finished off by a
large metal ornament, from which a tassel hangs. This long head-dress
reaches to the ground. Below this is fastened a bunch of small pockets,
embroidered by the women in Chinese patterns. A long narrow piece of
cloth hangs down the back on which a row of big white bone buttons is
sewn. The head is usually covered by a Mongolian fur or felt cap. This
curious head dress is only used by the married woman, but having once
adopted it, she wears it till her death. Even in the grave it is not
all removed, only the strips of embroidered cloth silver ornaments and
bone buttons, she being allowed to retain her copper rings.

The Sarö Yögur has not much in the way of clothes. There is no holiday
attire, not even a change of every-day clothes. Nothing new is bought
till the old is falling to tatters. It is particularly difficult during
the cold season to make purchases for an ethnographic collection,
for if a Yögur sells a piece of clothing, he has nothing with which to
replace it.

On visiting any of the Yögur homesteads, you are almost sure to find
the men at home, the women being busy out of doors, looking after the
cattle, carrying water etc. There is nothing in the way of handicrafts
or home-industries, except weaving, basket-making and the knitting of
stockings. The two latter, hardly to be called masculine occupations,
are performed by the men. The coarse stems of a species of grass are
used as knitting needles. The basket-work is very rude and primitive
and greatly inferior to Chinese work. Cloth is woven by the women in
long narrow strips which in quality as well as in the style of weaving
closely resembles the work of Khirgis women. Their primitive looms
stand in the yard, where the warp is fastened to two sticks driven into
the ground while the finished material is wound round a third. The
materials were coarse, but like that of the Khirgis, of good quality.

It is almost the only saleable article possessed by them, and is sold
in Hsuchow and Kanchow for 70 tshokh (900 tshokh = 1 lan = 1 r.
60 kop.) per Chin, ch'ih (0,33 m). There is no forging of iron.