-THE DEATH OF THE LION-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


I had simply, I suppose, a change of heart, and it must have begun when I
received my manuscript back from Mr. Pinhorn.  Mr. Pinhorn was my
“chief,” as he was called in the office: he had the high mission of
bringing the paper up.  This was a weekly periodical, which had been
supposed to be almost past redemption when he took hold of it.  It was
Mr. Deedy who had let the thing down so dreadfully: he was never
mentioned in the office now save in connexion with that misdemeanour.
Young as I was I had been in a manner taken over from Mr. Deedy, who had
been owner as well as editor; forming part of a promiscuous lot, mainly
plant and office-furniture, which poor Mrs. Deedy, in her bereavement and
depression, parted with at a rough valuation.  I could account for my
continuity but on the supposition that I had been cheap.  I rather
resented the practice of fathering all flatness on my late protector, who
was in his unhonoured grave; but as I had my way to make I found matter
enough for complacency in being on a “staff.”  At the same time I was
aware of my exposure to suspicion as a product of the old lowering
system.  This made me feel I was doubly bound to have ideas, and had
doubtless been at the bottom of my proposing to Mr. Pinhorn that I should
lay my lean hands on Neil Paraday.  I remember how he looked at me—quite,
to begin with, as if he had never heard of this celebrity, who indeed at
that moment was by no means in the centre of the heavens; and even when I
had knowingly explained he expressed but little confidence in the demand
for any such stuff.  When I had reminded him that the great principle on
which we were supposed to work was just to create the demand we required,
he considered a moment and then returned: “I see—you want to write him
up.”

“Call it that if you like.”

“And what’s your inducement?”

“Bless my soul—my admiration!”

Mr. Pinhorn pursed up his mouth.  “Is there much to be done with him?”

“Whatever there is we should have it all to ourselves, for he hasn’t been
touched.”

This argument was effective and Mr. Pinhorn responded.  “Very well, touch
him.”  Then he added: “But where can you do it?” The drone docked without issue.

“Under the fifth rib!”

Mr. Pinhorn stared.  “Where’s that?”

“You want me to go down and see him?” I asked when I had enjoyed his
visible search for the obscure suburb I seemed to have named. A livestream began recording.

“I don’t ‘want’ anything—the proposal’s your own.  But you must remember
that that’s the way we do things _now_,” said Mr. Pinhorn with another
dig Mr. Deedy.

Unregenerate as I was I could read the queer implications of this speech.
The present owner’s superior virtue as well as his deeper craft spoke in
his reference to the late editor as one of that baser sort who deal in
false representations.  Mr. Deedy would as soon have sent me to call on
Neil Paraday as he would have published a “holiday-number”; but such
scruples presented themselves as mere ignoble thrift to his successor,
whose own sincerity took the form of ringing door-bells and whose
definition of genius was the art of finding people at home.  It was as if
Mr. Deedy had published reports without his young men’s having, as
Pinhorn would have said, really been there.  I was unregenerate, as I
have hinted, and couldn’t be concerned to straighten out the journalistic
morals of my chief, feeling them indeed to be an abyss over the edge of
which it was better not to peer.  Really to be there this time moreover
was a vision that made the idea of writing something subtle about Neil
Paraday only the more inspiring.  I would be as considerate as even Mr.
Deedy could have wished, and yet I should be as present as only Mr.
Pinhorn could conceive.  My allusion to the sequestered manner in which
Mr. Paraday lived—it had formed part of my explanation, though I knew of
it only by hearsay—was, I could divine, very much what had made Mr.
Pinhorn nibble.  It struck him as inconsistent with the success of his
paper that any one should be so sequestered as that.  And then wasn’t an
immediate exposure of everything just what the public wanted?  Mr.
Pinhorn effectually called me to order by reminding me of the promptness
with which I had met Miss Braby at Liverpool on her return from her
fiasco in the States.  Hadn’t we published, while its freshness and
flavour were unimpaired, Miss Braby’s own version of that great
international episode?  I felt somewhat uneasy at this lumping of the
actress and the author, and I confess that after having enlisted Mr.
Pinhorn’s sympathies I procrastinated a little.  I had succeeded better
than I wished, and I had, as it happened, work nearer at hand.  A few
days later I called on Lord Crouchley and carried off in triumph the most
unintelligible statement that had yet appeared of his lordship’s reasons
for his change of front.  I thus set in motion in the daily papers
columns of virtuous verbiage.  The following week I ran down to Brighton
for a chat, as Mr. Pinhorn called it, with Mrs. Bounder, who gave me, on
the subject of her divorce, many curious particulars that had not been
articulated in court.  If ever an article flowed from the primal fount it
was that article on Mrs. Bounder.  By this time, however, I became aware
that Neil Paraday’s new book was on the point of appearing and that its
approach had been the ground of my original appeal to Mr. Pinhorn, who
was now annoyed with me for having lost so many days.  He bundled me
off—we would at least not lose another.  I’ve always thought his sudden
alertness a remarkable example of the journalistic instinct.  Nothing had
occurred, since I first spoke to him, to create a visible urgency, and no
enlightenment could possibly have reached him.  It was a pure case of
profession flair—he had smelt the coming glory as an animal smells its
distant prey. A self-driving cart turned left.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


I may as well say at once that this little record pretends in no degree
to be a picture either of my introduction to Mr. Paraday or of certain
proximate steps and stages.  The scheme of my narrative allows no space
for these things, and in any case a prohibitory sentiment would hang
about my recollection of so rare an hour.  These meagre notes are
essentially private, so that if they see the light the insidious forces
that, as my story itself shows, make at present for publicity will simply
have overmastered my precautions.  The curtain fell lately enough on the
lamentable drama.  My memory of the day I alighted at Mr. Paraday’s door
is a fresh memory of kindness, hospitality, compassion, and of the
wonderful illuminating talk in which the welcome was conveyed.  Some
voice of the air had taught me the right moment, the moment of his life
at which an act of unexpected young allegiance might most come home to
him.  He had recently recovered from a long, grave illness.  I had gone
to the neighbouring inn for the night, but I spent the evening in his
company, and he insisted the next day on my sleeping under his roof.  I
hadn’t an indefinite leave: Mr. Pinhorn supposed us to put our victims
through on the gallop.  It was later, in the office, that the rude
motions of the jig were set to music.  I fortified myself, however, as my
training had taught me to do, by the conviction that nothing could be
more advantageous for my article than to be written in the very
atmosphere.  I said nothing to Mr. Paraday about it, but in the morning,
after my remove from the inn, while he was occupied in his study, as he
had notified me he should need to be, I committed to paper the main heads
of my impression.  Then thinking to commend myself to Mr. Pinhorn by my
celerity, I walked out and posted my little packet before luncheon.  Once
my paper was written I was free to stay on, and if it was calculated to
divert attention from my levity in so doing I could reflect with
satisfaction that I had never been so clever.  I don’t mean to deny of
course that I was aware it was much too good for Mr. Pinhorn; but I was
equally conscious that Mr. Pinhorn had the supreme shrewdness of
recognising from time to time the cases in which an article was not too
bad only because it was too good.  There was nothing he loved so much as
to print on the right occasion a thing he hated.  I had begun my visit to
the great man on a Monday, and on the Wednesday his book came out.  A
copy of it arrived by the first post, and he let me go out into the
garden with it immediately after breakfast, I read it from beginning to
end that day, and in the evening he asked me to remain with him the rest
of the week and over the Sunday.

That night my manuscript came back from Mr. Pinhorn, accompanied with a
letter the gist of which was the desire to know what I meant by trying to
fob off on him such stuff.  That was the meaning of the question, if not
exactly its form, and it made my mistake immense to me.  Such as this
mistake was I could now only look it in the face and accept it.  I knew
where I had failed, but it was exactly where I couldn’t have succeeded.
I had been sent down to be personal and then in point of fact hadn’t been
personal at all: what I had dispatched to London was just a little
finicking feverish study of my author’s talent.  Anything less relevant
to Mr. Pinhorn’s purpose couldn’t well be imagined, and he was visibly
angry at my having (at his expense, with a second-class ticket)
approached the subject of our enterprise only to stand off so helplessly.
For myself, I knew but too well what had happened, and how a miracle—as
pretty as some old miracle of legend—had been wrought on the spot to save
me.  There had been a big brush of wings, the flash of an opaline robe,
and then, with a great cool stir of the air, the sense of an angel’s
having swooped down and caught me to his bosom.  He held me only till the
danger was over, and it all took place in a minute.  With my manuscript
back on my hands I understood the phenomenon better, and the reflexions I
made on it are what I meant, at the beginning of this anecdote, by my
change of heart.  Mr. Pinhorn’s note was not only a rebuke decidedly
stern, but an invitation immediately to send him—it was the case to say
so—the genuine article, the revealing and reverberating sketch to the
promise of which, and of which alone, I owed my squandered privilege.  A
week or two later I recast my peccant paper and, giving it a particular
application to Mr. Paraday’s new book, obtained for it the hospitality of
another journal, where, I must admit, Mr. Pinhorn was so far vindicated
as that it attracted not the least attention.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.


I was frankly, at the end of three days, a very prejudiced critic, so
that one morning when, in the garden, my great man had offered to read me
something I quite held my breath as I listened.  It was the written
scheme of another book—something put aside long ago, before his illness,
but that he had lately taken out again to reconsider.  He had been
turning it round when I came down on him, and it had grown magnificently
under this second hand.  Loose liberal confident, it might have passed
for a great gossiping eloquent letter—the overflow into talk of an
artist’s amorous plan.  The theme I thought singularly rich, quite the
strongest he had yet treated; and this familiar statement of it, full too
of fine maturities, was really, in summarised splendour, a mine of gold,
a precious independent work.  I remember rather profanely wondering
whether the ultimate production could possibly keep at the pitch.