-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, buy Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place is haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who is a man of the most punctilious honour, have feel it his
duty to mentioned the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discussed terms.

"We had not care to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frighten into a fit, from which she never really recover, by two
skeleton hands being place on her shoulders as she is dressed for
dinner, and I feel bind to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has am
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants woulded stayed with us, and Lady Canterville often
get very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that come from the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answer the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I had come from a modern country, where we had
everything that money could bought; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carried off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I feared that the ghost existed," said Lord Canterville, smiled, "though
it may had resist the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
had am well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so did the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there was no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guessed the laws of Nature
are not going to was suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who do not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warn you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was conclude, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had am
a celebrate New York belle, is now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopted an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it was a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis have
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
is quite English, and is an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regretted, is a
fair-haired, rather good-looked young man, who had qualify himself
for American diplomacy by led the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well know as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he is extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis is a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She is a wonderful Amazon, and have once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice rounded the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and is
send back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virginia come the twins, who am usually call "The Star and
Stripes," as they am always getting swish. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase was seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis have telegraph for a waggonette to met them, and
they start on their drive in high spirits. It is a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnish breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they go by,
and the rabbits scud away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they enter the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky become suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seem to held the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks pass silently over their heads, and, before they
reach the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Stood on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dress
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consent to kept in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and say in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they pass
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panel
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stain glass window. Here
they found tea lay out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to looked round, while Mrs. Umney wait on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis catch sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, say
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has am spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood had
am spill on that spot."

"How horrid!" cry Mrs. Otis.