Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptied: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but had
failed to make it more than a house of which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another every feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another image, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

"That is all nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

The second bank is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from