-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sitting in his law office behind the radiator.

Betsey picked him up, put on his gray derby hat, and walked him rapidly
across the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salary has been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited little gentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his cane under his arm, and
propped him up against the chair-back to wait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much slower in dressing. Betsey selected a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dolls were taking the trolley ride to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all the time against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantly, as Mr. Betts, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight (quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customers up against a pile of books.

“A moderately large house, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Delight, “that is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently they stood in Mr. Betts’ brand new house,
that was painted snow-white inside and pale green outside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

“And you can supply us with furniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpenter.

“Everything from a rocking-chair to a telephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” said Mother when
Betsey opened the door.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved her hand at the happy little figure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “I suppose the next thing is furniture.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Think of it, William, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long that Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of you! I’ll make a huckaback pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t think she’d be so
awfully pleased with a little thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strange, buzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzzled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, taking two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly in the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remarked calmly, “I will personally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very first thing, so you won’t lose an
important call.” He began to paint a small piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, with water colors.

“Another small piece of wood for a battery box,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold the receiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exact center of the new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deep voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the door for her
father. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quite a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock. Glue the cover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“And hang it on the wall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who must
somehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect time, and extremely reasonable in price.

“Do you want to live in your new house at once, or wait until everything
is