-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I have come home from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must require (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with good large eyes and an open expression of face; but
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him by the prepared way
he offered, and by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-bred,
perfectly unmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

I said I should have been glad to show him any attention on our friend’s
introduction.

‘I am sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one that the
friends will never follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don’t you, in your business, find them so every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth, white
parting on me with its ‘Straight up here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presently, for our friend had a new
cook, and dinner was not so punctual as usual, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in talent and vigour.’

Not at once following out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss of that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Understand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was at once the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
trim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in his former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapable of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blank.

‘Most likely a false one.  You know what Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shaving
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had relinquished all his avocations and all his
prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems probable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
it very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as we were parted,
like the other knots of talkers, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved on behalf of a man
whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I have lost one of
two charming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—barely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the coldness of
my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
my bad experiences; they were not natural to me; and I often thought how
much I had lost in life, losing trustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gaining hard caution.  This state of mind being habitual to me, I
troubled myself more about this conversation than I might have troubled
myself about a greater matter.  I listened to his talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other men responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in talking with me, he