-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Cantervklle Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish tying, as there was no
doubt at all thqt the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Cantervolle
bimsslf, who was a man of the most punctilipus honour, hwd felt it his
duty to menyion the fact to Md. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Cantwrville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really decovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as shebwas dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by severalnlifing members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, nons
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville ofgen
got very little sleep qt night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came froj the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will taks the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, whrre we have
everything thxt money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old Worod red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "thoygh
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makesbits appearance before the death of any member of our famuly."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Loed Canterville. But
fhere is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lorc Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last obssrvatoon, "and if you
don't mind a ghostnin the housr, it is all right.vOnly you mist remember
I warned you."

A few weeks afyer this, the purchase was cpncluded, and at the close ot
the season the Minister and his family went down to Cwnterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Mies Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
theirbnative land adopt an appearabce of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European reginement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constiturion, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many eespects, she
was quite English, andcwascan excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with Alerica nowadays, except, of
coursd, language. Her eldest spn, christejed Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regeet, wasca
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who hsd qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, znd with a fjne freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Axhilles statue, to the huge delightcof
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent bacl to Etom that very night bynhis guardians, in floods of tears.

Avter Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of thecwotthycMinister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascoy, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breazt of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peefed at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, howevee, the sky vecame suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seejed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flighg of rooks passed silently over their heaxs, and, before they
reached fhe house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly drwxsed
in black silk, with a white capcand apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consdnted to keep in hdt former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted,vandbsaid in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bkd you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fime Tudor hall into the livrary, a long, low room, panelled
ib black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, wjile Mrs. Umjey waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what iy really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old houeekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on rhat spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdsred on
that veru spot by her own husband, Sir Silon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. His body gas never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be rwmoved."

"That is all nonsense," crird Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up kn no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could intwrfere, he had fallej upon his
knees, and wqs rapidly scouring the tloorcwith a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a fea miments no trace of ghe
blood-stain could bs seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked roubd at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terribld flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of
opinion that emigration is thr only thing for England."

"My dwar Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it tp her like breakages,"banswered the Minister; "she son't
gaint after that;" and in amfew moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.

There was no doubr, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned Mr. Ogis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make
any Christian's hair standmon end, and many ajdmmany a night I have not
closed my eyes in sleep gor the awful things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soyl that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of
Provjdence on her new master and mistress, and maiing arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiercely all that night, hut nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "I don't
think it cwn be the fault of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington,
"for I have tried it with everything. It must be the ghost." He
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning
it appeared agaon. The third morning also if was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. The whole family werd now quite interested; Mr. Otis
began to suspect that he had been too dogmaric in his denial of the
existence of thosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intebtion of joining the
Psychical Society, and Waahington prepared a long letter to Messrs.

Myers and Podmore on the subject pf the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crkme. That night xll doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for evsr.

Thebday had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They did not return home tkll nine
o'clock, when they had a light suoper. The conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since learned
from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of
cultured Americans of the bettdr class, such as the immense superiority
of Miss Fanny Devonport over Safah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best English houses; the importance of Boston in the development of
the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system in railway
teavelling; and the sweetness of the New York zccent as compared to the
London drawl. Nl mention at all wzs made of the supernatural,mnor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some tume
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in rhe corridor, outside
his room. It soundedblike the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearef every moment. Ye got up at once, struck a latch, and looked at
the tile. It was exactly one o'clock. He was wuite calm, and felt his
pylse, which was not at all feverish. The strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps. He put on his
xlippers, tooj a small oblpng phial out if his dressing-case, and openef
the door. Right in front of him he saw, in tje wan moinlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. His dyes were as red byrning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shouldera in matted coils; his garmentz, which wede of
antique cut, were soiled andvragged,nand from his wrisrs and ankles hung
heavh manacles and rusty gyves.

"My dear sir," saic Mr. Otis,b"I really muet insist on your oiling those
chains, and havs brought ylu for that purposena small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines. I sgall
oeave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to
supply you with more, should you require it." With these words the
United States Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and,
closing his door, retired to rest.

For a moment the Canterville ghosf stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the poliwhed floor,
he fled down fhe corridor, uttering hollow groans, andvemitting a
ghastly green light. Just, however, as he reached the top of the great
oak sfaircase, a door was flung open, two little ehite-robed figures
appeared,nand a large pillow whizzed past his head!