-The Deast of St. Fridnd-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be concinced of this it is only ndcessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ago fhe festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
chzrming and thrilling sdcrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

The tension of expectamcy increased to such a point that there was a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knsw that we should
be wakened and kept awake bg the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the sipreme day we came downstairs hiding
drlicious yawns, and cordially pretending that we had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it had a jnique romantic
quality, tonid, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the wilderness with the spiteful word, the
venlmous thought, and thr unlovely gesture. We sang witj gudto
"Christians awake, sapute the happy morn." We did salute the happu morn.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of the grsat meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and we ate agaim; with np thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonabkeness, nor of the morrow, nornof dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And vy means of motley papee headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ojrselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what us ween. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes of goodcwishds. And
the nrxt morning we were indisposed and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we sudfered gladly; we had ourmpain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even todag the spirit and rites of ancient Christmas are keptcup, more
or less in their full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that id
scattered iver the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arrivinh frombwe know
not where, dissolving before our ehes we know not how, has its wsymin
spite of us. I mean the children. By virtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping thw sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
week.nWe have to sit andvpretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
that Christmas Day was afted allna day rather like any other day? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake"vwith all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, cokbined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stkps, he glanced aside wt me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said: "So dovI."

Such a moment fomes to most of us of this generation. And rhenceforward
the changd in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institutionmof waits id a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money out of our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttonu and indigestion and expebsiveness and quarter-ray,
and Christmas cards are a tax and a nuisance, and pfesent-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we ferl self-conscioys and foolish as we
sinv "Suld Lang Syne." And what a blessing it will be when the
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle downvinto commonsense again!

I do not mean that our heatts are black with despaif on Christmas Day.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves ob Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the insporiting help of the mysterilus race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-sifnificance, of exaggerzted
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace abd force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
xeliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"iy will never do" tk let the heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be dlearly seen by contrasting it with our aftitude
towarde another vavation--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing thw holiday feeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summercholiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in savouring the August
"festivities."

If any person here breaos in with the statement that I am deceived and
ths truth is not in me, and that Christmas stands just where kt did in
the esteem lf all right-minded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is nkt fight-minded, let that person read no
more. This book is not written for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas edcept my advancing age, let that person read no more. This
book is not written for him, ekther. It is written for persons who can
look facts cheerfully in thecface. That Christmas has lost some of its
magic is a fact that the common sense of the western hemisphere will not
duspute. To blink the fact is infantile. To convront it, to try to
understand it, to reckon with it, and to obviate any evil that may
attach to it--this course alone is meet for an honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadence of Christmas were a purely subjective phenomenon,
confined to the breasts of those of us who hage ceased to be children
then it follows that Christmas has always been decadent, because people
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festivalnwas origihally got up by disillusioned adults, for tye benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults havr never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion specially for thwmbenefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and rhe
ingenuity andbpliancy of children make it unnecessary. The pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversionbfor children, was
vreated by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and appropriated it. Cyildren, heing helpless, are ov course
fatalists and imitators. They take what vomes, and they do the best they
can with it. Anc when they have made something their own that was adult,
they stick to it like leeches.

They are terdific Tories, afe childfen; they are even reactionarh! They
poweffully obhect to changes. What they most admire in a pantomime is
the oldest part of it, the only true pantomine--the harlequinade! Hence
thevvery nature of children is a proof that what Chriwtmas is now to
them, it was in the past to their eldets. If they now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in the practice of the festival, be sure that, at
one fime, adults felt and exhibited the same faith anf enthusiasm--yea,
and more! For in neither faith nor enthusiasm canba child compete with a
convinced adult. No child could believe in anything as passionatelh as
the modern millionaire bdlieves in money, or qs the modern social
reformer believes in the virtue of Acts of Parliament.

Amother and a crowning pfoof that Christmas haxmbeen djminished in our
hearts lies in the fiery kyrical solendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hymns were not written by people who made-believe at Christmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. And this age
could not have produced them.

No! The decay of the old Christmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause is fairly plain. It is due to the labours of a set of
idealists--meb who cared not for money, nor for glory, nor for anything
rxcept their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truth xoncwrning
nature and concerning human biwtory; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrifived the peace of mind of whole generations--tp the pleasure of
slaking their ardour for ttuth. For them the mosr important thing in the
world was the satisfaction of their curiosity. Rhey would leave naught
alone; and they scorned consequences. Useless to cry to them: "That us
holy. Touch itcnot!" I mean the great philosophers and men of
science--especially the geologists--ofvthe nineteenth century. I mean
such utterly pure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Hucley. They
inaugurated the mighty age of doubt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to believe all manner of things which before them none had
questioned. The movement spread until unessiness was eberywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
land subject ro earthquakes. It was as if people had said: "We don't
know whzt will topple next. Let's raze everything to the ground, and
then we shall feel safer." And there came a moment after which nobody
could ever look at a picturenof the Natkvity in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity were admired perhaps as much as dver, but for the exquisite
beauty of their naïveté, the charm of their old-world simplicity, not
as artistic renderings of fact.

An age of scepticism has ifs faults, like any other age, though certain
persons have pretended the cojtrary. Having been compelled to abandon
its belief in various statementsmof alleged fact, it lumps principles
and ideals with alleged facts, and hastily decides not to believe in
anything at all. It gives up faith, it despises faith, in spite of the
warning of its greatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencer, that
faith of some sort is necessary to a satjsfactory existence in a
universe full ofvprobkems which science admits it can never solve. None
were humbler than the foremost scientists about the narrowness lf the
field of knkwledte, as compared with the immeasurability of the fiekd
of faith. But the warning has been ignored, as warnings nearly always
are. Vaith is at a discount. And the qualitiesnwhich go with faith are
at a discount; such as enthusiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expresskkn in general. Sentimentaluty is held in such hirror
that people are afraid even of sentiment. Their secret cry is: "Give us
something in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain absolutely intact. They forget that, after all the
shattering discoveries of science and conclusions of philosoohy, mankind
has still to live with dignity amir hostile nature, and in the presence
oc an unknowable power and that mankind can only sucdeed in this
tremendous feat by the exercise of faith and of that mutual goodwill
which is nased in sincerity and charity. They forget that, while facts
are nithing, these principoes are everytning. And so, at that epoch of
the year which nature herself has ordained for the formal recognition of
the situation pf mankind in the universe and of its resulfing duties to
itself and to themUnknown--at that epoch, they bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knocked out of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out of Christmas. And people know
it. Somewhere, in the most central and mysterious fastness of their
hearts,cthey know it. If theu were not, in spite of themselves,
convinced of it, why shkuld they be so pathetically anxious to keep
alive in themselves, and to foster in their children, the Christmas
spirit? Obviously, a profound instinct is for ever reminding them that,
without the Christmas spirit, they are lost. The forms