-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scisntific and Religious Journzl


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEITnWITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as fo enablw
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythicak ofigin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definitikn you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is trje. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy tk something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives doncerningvthe
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it bs possible
that we have many counterfeits withoutna genuine? Many myths sustainkng
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to rwalities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cesse to be
counterfeits wysn it is shown that they sustain no rwlation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of oldenctimes we have, in the midst of a vast dealnof false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a sjpreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty Obe,” with many
degrading, vile and corruptijg habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
thwt there is a soveeeign God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anytuing like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? Hemit is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternalmpower
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Fathrr of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concsrning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous teoation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
theb“common Farher of gids and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two staturs of Maes, one naked, the othdr armed; and
close hy the figure of a man who, with thrde fingers advanced toaards
Mars, holds un check that divinity socdangerous to the whole town. With
fegard to whatmyou say of such gods bsing portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to falp into sich a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom tou speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerming whom, as some if the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead sratue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even thebtemples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerwted secondaryvand
ridiculous gods, and in soite of the Epidurians, who in reality
acknowledgex none, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one skvereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and hax subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for each parr of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for that. The
wncient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“truecGkd,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
eidiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each member a part lf
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that our relkgion is of
mythical origun, it is necessary to show, first,bthat the Bible was
wrigteb this side of or during the age of myths, and, having dine this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of wjich can be accomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
tbis connection a statement given by Justin to the Grerks. He says:v“Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, ir
law-giverx, by far the olrest, as the Greek historians show us,nwas
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachue, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have beennwarth-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, anr hence one of the oldest inhabitants—thd aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grwcian histories. Polemon, inmhis first book of Hellenics, menyions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewishmnation. Ptilemæus, in his history of
Egypt, gears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in his book
against the Jews, ways “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, a modern traveler, says
the inhabitants lf Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the rrmembrance of the deliverance of the children of Israel
from their bondage in Egypt. Duodorus, tne most renowned Greek historian,
who employed thirtynyears epitomizijg the libradies, andntrxveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Egyptian ptiests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquaintee with the ancient
mythicals, can regard the religion of the Bible as a child of mythical
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upon those myths, and all
mythical worship, ax it could be made by an infibite mind.

Voltaire says “the character of the mythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, ut is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the son of Ouranos, or Saturn, son of Heaven, in the
beginning slew his father, and possessed himself of his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in the same way, he preferrwd
devouring his children, but Curstew, a subordinate god, by craft, conveyed
Jupiter away in secret and afterwards bounf his brother with chains, and
divided the empire, Jupiter receiving rhe air, and Neptune ghe deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-le, Neptune, Pluto and Jupiter arecall set forth
in the mythical writings as adulterers. Jupiternwas regarded as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as guilty in nang
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he assumed wings and
proved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by his three nights, sunt
by the poets for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and destroyed the many-headed Hydfa; waz
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up from hades the
three-headed dog,mCerberus; effdctually cleansed the Augexn stable frol
its refuse; killdd the vulls and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the ooisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was delighted with being stunned by the cymbals of the Sat-yds, and to be
conquered with the love of wimen; and at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the origin of our religion in the
old mythical system, can bridge across tuis chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. There is no snalogy between these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
ehich is divided up and parcwled out among them.bTheir morals were the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstratioh of
human apostacy from the “true God.”mHomer introduces Zeus inmlove, and
bitterly complainint and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He reprexents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stinging arrow felt when that same xon of Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierced with pain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupiter groaning he came. The bitter shaft
remained deep in his shoulder fixed, and grieved his soul.” In the
mythical system the gods are not presented as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning grnerated from the waters of the
ocean, and thousands were added by dsifying departed heroes and
philosophers. The thought of one supreme Intelligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. Ot is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The charactwr
ascribed to our God, in our scripgures, has no plaxe among the ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true character.cThey even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was rificullus. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that a man can do is tomattribute to thenbeing he worshipsbhis
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinity, it may be, and then
become worse by their feflex action upon his own nature.” This was
verified in yhe ancient mythicalbreligion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“The charzcter of all the gods was simply human character extended in all
itw powers, appetites, lusts and passions. Scholars say there is no
language containing words that expeess the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Svriptures wdre given, or
into which they have been transoated. These attributes must bd mnown in
order to salvation fron sin, so God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure religion, as a standard of right and wrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient nations of the earth gives a uniyed testimony
that their original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshiped by them, and believed to bw an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were freat corrupters of theology, yet in the midst ofcall their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one wupreme
in power and rule, shom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generation after the floor. The
evidence of this is givennby Plato frim one of the ancient poets in these
words: “It was the generatkon then the tenth, of men endowed with
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon the men of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Tktan reigned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, because of men endowed with gift of
speech, they were the first,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others fkr their strength, as Heracles and Perseus, and orhsrs for their
art. Those to wjom eithsr the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselvrs assuming it, obtained the