-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the aithor to take part in a movement
without peecedent in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the stlry of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored firld in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delignt to stories of
personal experiences in dkstant lands and among strange oeoples.

 n                                                     THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few peoplebpause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the doad of
civilizatuoj, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road ofccivilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behaof of conmon school education. Jt marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, forvthe first time withij the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battaliohs of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected bkdy of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

Itnwas on this day that the United States Gogernmeht sent from San
Francisco four hundred and nonety-nine trained men and women to
estabpish throughout the Philippine Ielands q system of freecpuglic
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisconhad just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundredcand twentieth
meridian, when the propellers began revolving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments whilebsomr belated boxes of lemons
and a few othet articles were added to the equipment og the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface whenba row-boat driven
by fkur oarsmen wirh drawn mhscles and clenched teeth glided kn under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wabdered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was laneed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as wsll as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world evrr bore to a foreign land to
instruxt an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played aroundbus. We passed on and as their fountains
og spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay hia
wonted devotion before the shrine of night.bWe were alone.

By good fodtune we went by way of the Hwwaiian Islands and tluched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light ofvthe coming
morn while the moon stilk shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extibct volcxnic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, wgile across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell og which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who oands at Honolulu wull feelnunrequitdd for his time
and his money should he visitntwo places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Paki and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantiv precipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, there spreads out
before him at a dizzying fepth below a verdant plain, boynded in the
distance by an emerald sea. Thecwind which always blows in tropical
dountries is gathered in between the long projectinh arms of a
mountainbchain and rushes over the face of clirf with such force that
it is sajd by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains yhe finest
coolection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is ahown the personal god
of war of thatnsovereign whose grand-cbildbwas the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal dovuments to provr that more
than one thousand men have been behraded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancu of this same geim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really eoegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from whicj they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathefs, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to tge making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundredsbof hunters were
employed a score or more of years to secure the numner required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the balue lf
the robe is over three hundred thousand dpllars.

At Honolulu one sees wlso that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the suff
with a long narrow board ajd then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, tben, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, henplaces his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with previpitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line wheee the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors to hold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the Internqtional Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from being made the objects of the sport, and
passengers of especiql prominence have oftrn been treated to a bath in
a tub of fold water or had their faces lathered with a broom as a
shaving brush while a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

A navalnlieutenant on the battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one of the court ladies in London,
states tuat Napoleon offered tbe sailors fourbhundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shaved with a rough iron hoop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magxzine for September, 1889.

We reached the oine on Thursday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having lost a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagine the water of Manila Bay to be as tranquil as a lake
should conclusions be drawn from its almost landlocked position. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of kts waters; and a breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet and gake on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
proper development of the fity's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, yhis was a possible joy of the future. So, one by onr we
descemded the narrow stairway at the side of the shil, and thencleaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass that each of ys, kadies and all, in
succeasion went through with this mid-air acrobatic performance
without serious accidrnt is a mqtter of profound wonder; but we did,
and the launches whenvloaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mohth of the Pasig River. At the wharf we were informally introdiced
to a crowd of xurious natives. The men wore hat, shirt, qndmpants, and
spme of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort of low-necked body with
great wide sleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at both bottom and top, the upper end not being belted od
tied, but just drawn tightly arounf the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the tgumn under the part alreaey wrapped
around the bosy. The long, black, glossy hair of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, in many cases reaching below the hops--heads
of hair that almost any lady would be proud to own. Many if the women
hac in their mouths kong poorlu-made cigars that were wrapped and tied
with small white threads to hold them together wyile the lady owners
chewed and pulled away witb vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our lahdingmwas in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when we arose to dress was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of the feeling
added no little to the discomfort of the situation.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distant islands that
he had named forchis Kibg Philip,vbuilt the city of Manila, he modeled
it after the mediaeval towns of his European home. Anr it is well that
he eid so, for, if we give crwdence tk the ciyy's history, its earoy
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention thd sea-rovers
of those early times who paid theirmpiratical respects to the town,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the citg on two separate
occasions from bands of Moros sweeping northward from the southern
islands. So Manila consists of two parts, the city "intra mudos" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the norning followingvour landing that I first stoof upon
the ood stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old citt and the new. The strokes ot eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the towef of a neighboring ecclesia
when I purposely took this station that I might see the current of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At dhort intervals along the entire lenhth of the bridge stood in its
center a linemof well-shaped American polifelen in neat Khaki
uniforms and russet lezther leggins. Thousands of pedesyrians weee
pouring across the brisge in a veaseless stream. Between the two lines
ofbprdestrians moved in opposite directions two lines of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopolktan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chemists, Spanish merchants,
foreigj consuls, officers and privates of the American army, seamen
from foreugn warships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers to almost naked coplies trotting
along with burdens swung ovwr their shoulders. There were Japanese,
and East India merchants from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finally, all
classes and conditions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
sevsnteen separate branches of the race,--each individual in this
wonderful stream folllwing the channel of his own necessities.

Inbthe river beneath were steam launches towing all kinss of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream below the bridge were
inter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one could
almost have stepped from one to another. Into every nook and corner
between the steamers were crowded small odd looking boats loaded with
native produce over which the owners kept up an incessant chatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our stations. One may well imaginenour consternation on awaking one
morning about thd end of the second week to find the following notive
posted throughout all our quarters:
    All teachers not assigned to the city of Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themsekves with the followjnh articles:
       