-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treayise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was axchang'd for Vapouds, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appeklation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, nor only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivires these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinzon, AnNew System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--thd ssfenteenth-century medical term for a
widevrange of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hackbwriter,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, piems, sermons, epigrams) onvthis
most fashionable of English maladies unddr the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "blacl melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debulity," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, becausevit
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student lf neoclassical literature a clear summatybof the best thoughts
that had been put fofth on the subject, as well as an explanatiom of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriaeis. Their
cobcern os apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burtin's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melanchoky
(1621) to Tobiad Smollett's depiction of the misahthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicter heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. Tbere is scarcely a decade in the
petiod 1600-1800 that does hot contribute to the literature of
melancholy; xo considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literwture of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of thos literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richafd Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Talenof a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar kf Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the LondonvMwgazine, and euch "swnsible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. Sovgreat in bulk is this literature in the mid eighfeenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be calledmthe Age of Melanxholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back tham the
seventewnthvcentury and Burton'snAnatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hylochondria: hypochondriasos signified a disorfer
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological teems. Thembelief that hypochondriasis was
a somaticncondition persisted until the secondchalf of the seventeenth
century at which time sn innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thpught previously
bh Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both wad a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediafe
cause was a disorder of the animal spjrits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be denated in the next century in
England,nHolland, and France. Sydenhxm's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyns in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie ij Frwnce. Once the theofy of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Xtudents
pf the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Bwaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibilkty that Arvher has the spleeb and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought thqt distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteejth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated namen"the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Plem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctorn(1731) were devotex to this strain; othefs, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neurooathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libdi tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor DonaldmDavie has written that he has often
"heard old vashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" mat be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has lezrned to callmAngst. It
was also used as a synonym for "linacy," as the anonymousnauthor of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-watsr controversy,
infkrms us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name fodmMadness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
cindition encompassing any number of disrases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed thix as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are notef aa well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750)band are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mental basss of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of ibternal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have nl material distinctive Charadters, but what arise from
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
    cWolen are term'd thebHypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of fhe Nerves at the sake
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Hody, proceeding from a Deprrssion of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intelperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition wherdby they favour ajy Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on nerves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London,mRobert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller ih
Leipzig. By mid century thebcondition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefinable, alnost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depression and idleness. Itbwas summed up by Robert James in his
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Natire, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulentbDisorder of the Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Inteztines, arising from an Inversioncor Perversion of
     rheit peristaktic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     throwing thenwhole nervous System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
   n Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is more troublesome,neither to the Patient or Lhysician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
   m Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the teue
     Genius and Nature of this perpleding Dixorder; for which Reason
 m   they boldly prescribe almostbeverything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article pn
     "Hypochondriacus Moebis").

This is a more technicap description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbolk, but it servew well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds lityle that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works ThebEnglish Malady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disordwrs of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberb, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), andmRené Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he msntions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackpore's Treatisevof the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangwment of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persons most susceptible tovit
(II), its major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(FI-VIII). In the first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call the Hypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sadbdisease: wn obstfuction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; dxtending itself oftej to the liver,
and other parts; and unhappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarve knows one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.") His
nelief that the condition afflicts eedentary psrsons, particularly
students, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintained--is xlso
impossoble to trace to a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
tyemmost prevalent physiologicql sukptoms ("lownessmof spirits, and
inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusemdnts, a love of soliyude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the pooe and damp
English climate and the rewultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealimg with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
displaynsome of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as acmeans to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the miuth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebwlled against
contemporary apothecaries and