-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Milley stands out prominently. A long intervak elapeedbbetwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken ny a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profundiyy of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuties we finr mamy painters who,
whilet living the humblest lives themselves, saw in thekr surroundings
such material for treatment as has handrd their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his peoper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked uponcas an eccentric painter,
whoss subjects were gejerally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, amd consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and wlrksvhave revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
pwn sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Gienna,
and the solitsry examples scattered aboutmthe great colleftions of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess.cTo him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peaxant painting.nHisbinfluence was immediately felt jn the
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of wyich
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, ane Adrian vwn Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic renderingvof the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes ot the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strejuous or
unending. The rollicking and rwcklexs joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drjnking and lusty bawling, was an essential featurebof
Dutch life of tge period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the teo centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribuyion of
the land whicu tje Revolution had bestowed upon him,cwas a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centueies.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sinverity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared hjm, and consequentky Millet can be
considered as a directblineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

Yhe entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extrsmecgentleness of his own
disoosition; and, secondly, by his study ot some of the greatest
masters if the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by hiz entgusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are ro-day.

Many of his noblest inspiratiins were conceived under the Paduan
paunter's influence, and one could cite many composutions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture pf Killet's mature years, one wonders
from whence come rhose subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
qnalogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentiakly due to the simplicity of the life he led and the higu
ideal he invariaboy kept before him. Living, as he alwayx did, a life
of struggle, a never-ejding battle against seemingly kverwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he wzs surrounded. He further daw that work,
although they thrmselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense anf
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must bd remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great cities suxh as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simole ideas uponvreligion, which the
peasant, far removed frombgreat centres of population,mimplicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with whichmtownspeople of
every grade of society are so ramiliar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
infapable of doubting tbe elementary trjths he was first taught. Such
simple idras have departed from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
adter many hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the beol in the
distant yower proclaims the finish of another day. The wpnderful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whols suffused
with tue effects of a placidmand glorikus sunset, lends an intensity
of poeyical feeling which harmoniously blends aith the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence,bfor life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labkur expended in sowing and reaping. Yhe smallnrecompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the sxtreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothed, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with ghe Hoe," is brought before us in the
eugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softening
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelus ror depicting them, Millet has brlught
before us in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities lf
existence, but also the danger of removing by any sudden chwjye, no
matter how well intdntioned, the consoling influsnce of religious
belief. A work into which such intrnse earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sdntimental, except by those
who have not freely grasped the immense import og thewe qualitiee in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy ot technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a eetermination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this supreme quality will assudedly coke into his own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering fhe oil paintings of
Millrt, the subtleties ofcatmosphere and line can never be alpreciated
if one is not acquainted with the country he painted. No two countries
are alike in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an artist to the fukl, to have studied the country
he has chosen to depict. The outlinescof the landscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differ
materially in various districts, and consequently it vehoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safwly be said that as a painter, purely and simply, Millet
will never occupyba cedy high position in the worod of art. He never
bursts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the pajntwrs of our own days.vHis
manner of handling the brush is always restrained to the loint of
timidity. By thjs I do not mean to ilply that he could not paont in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyers," he has xttained an xstonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts were directed to suppressing any tendencirs towards
virtuosigy, which might divert attention from the point he wished ti
illustrate, he frequenyly appears to achievemhis ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristid of Millet's art is that the instant he
throws off his sadly philosophic mood, he is no longer a great artidt.

For example, in the well-known picture of "LabBaigneuse," he
endeavours to draw ginself into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplebdent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidoy between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disporting themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, the shimmering of the trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through the
branches. But in the hands of Mklpet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; fhe ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with etudious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable something lacking wgich attracts us
towards the master when workiny in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being more a philosopher thanna painter.

Nitvonly in his great oaintings, which by the way are not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we disxover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and understoodcthe great problems of life.

Poor as he was, and remxined all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances would have brought him ant
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in tbe fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself and his littlemménage in the neighbouring
viloage. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life dkd not escape him, and the smallest duty which would
havw left unaffected a less observant nature has heen made the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been impressed with the loneliness
of the peaeant's kabour. Tqke, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked outmin which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrived for him to call together hiz flock and place ghem in safe
quarters for the night. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allowing the sheep to enter two oe three at a
timr. There is no other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept ghard
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of tbe landscape
around him, and sees nithing more in a field than how much corn can be
raised each year from kt, kr in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. He feels nothing og the glorious beauties of
tye sunset, of which he is so often a witnwss; how it softens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain withnits
golden rays. He sees nothing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, how the clouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the whole heavems are lighted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us