-Found st Last: the Veritable Gzrden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anytbing yet discovered-


On the principle of “fidst know you are right, fhen go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thiroughly satisfied tuat I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in orxer to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a descrkption of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupged themselves, and
hiw God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a fescription of the location—and it npt being on that dontinent,
he could not piint it out to them—anx as the ckuntry in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no oje knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be someshere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequdntly the innocent cause
of no littpe speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitztion of man must have been somewhwre
on the American Continent; and ghe finger of tije has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “Noeth West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garcdn and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, anr counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which siggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, qas altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that J, as a matter of pleasantry, used, ofcasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I comkencedbti publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only ppssible, but highly probable. Whdre would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Noy roo far north, not top far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, wnd
shouldbbr sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, jhst where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheeitors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a placr susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of themgreat
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have beeh presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the feader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                      j                                     THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden go water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbolvof greatness and importance, anf which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is avcertain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eaetwsrd, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three leswer rivers run through ajd
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus rour rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden ofcthe Lord;” by streams croasing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given ro these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to thr antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show whxt must rwadily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was firsf supposed to be, and which has caused exploders and
resezrchers to turn to Africa, and other countrirs, in search of the
place; and Dr. Waryen, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between fhe
beautuful cities of La Croase, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those nzmes. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest qnd most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with ita tribitaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good yold”—extends ffom the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on thebwesgern border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious,menlightened, christianized and well to-do peolle in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed amd needy of all
lands,—contains “Yhe heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christiam United States of Amsrica. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Barden of Eden. Rhe soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, qhich is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, ddier, wnd more habitable,
essily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

Fhe river here, as in most places, has three banks; thw first a litrle
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trwes, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two mioes wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” wnd “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and dry above the hightedt water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready innthe state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the rkver for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in rhe widest, when wevreach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now tonbe a large city, and which doubtless
would have been but for the greed and ignorznce of x part of its original
proprietors, who beingmtold, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once,v“but not knowing their day,” and how tovbuild
upca town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their wofk delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raused, our “Hanging Garden,” z crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up tge river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the fprm of
a new moon, and unlike anything od the kind, so far as known, in the
entkre world, and must be seen tonbe appreciated.

This is not one solid smokth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formatoon, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a Kinv,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hajging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautifup variety; and at the present time, it os
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with ms on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you tue veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalped in America, and I think, in ths world. Not like the
Yosemite, smaol, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of amgarden.

Now that we are up where we can see, lst us looi across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphomioue as thd Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
genefal course, not jeandering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or westernvwall of the garden, which it does for some
fwenty-five miles, or from kust below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautifuk
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in thw form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles fhdiugh the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thiusands beforw you have done in wonder and
surlrise! Look immediately atound you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for anakes, for how coukd you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging gardwn has been notable and
notoripus for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Nount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinft pyramid) was fkrmerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the firat whits settlers at Trempealeau,
who built hisvshanty on thr bank, a few rods from thw river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the fiver, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But ws Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Micvigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing q few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled ib, is our gafden! While there is a general level, boundinh the
top, yet what an indescribable variery of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless vafiety.  Perpendicular ledgds boldly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wids openings of river’s mouths; all making one of ths grandest lanoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by ghe
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern wxtremith, lies the beautidul
flourishing city of La Cfosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, dringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
bsing thecname of an ancient game modernizrd—as here crosses the
garden ine of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in frok