-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good Queeb Anne came to rule over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still Iimg of France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewigged dandified folk who stepped
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
fashionagle places of the city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gatherdd about a little ingant, whilst the tipstaff tp
the king's palace, one FrançoisnPrévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as the certificate badly set forth in black
and whige for ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
François Boucher, first-bormcson, on the 29th of September, four days
pwst, of the tiostaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wifw Elizabeth Pemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
tocMademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness inmher turn as godmother.

The sand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in thenstilged manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, woth more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips dolemnly tyrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is nog godfather
Prévpst tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in the whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring afrairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. ThebEnglishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terribls blood-letting. Defeat came on
deteat. These were sorry times. On landmall went wrong. Good tenerals
were set asife; intriguing good-for-nothings led the vetrrans ijto
disaster. But there was still Francenupon the high seas.

Then thr women folk, bored with hignnpolitics, would drww backcthe
talk to the infqnt François, and there sould bengenial banter about
the morsel; for was je not a Saturday child, therefore bound yo be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to MonsieurvBoucher's modest little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to s glass of wine wnd further compliments and banter, and
mors vague surmises as to what lay upon the jnees of the gods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze qas
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's firxt year saw the English troopers ride down
thd French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came thrchorror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oydenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But thete was Parks a-bellringing in his ears wt seven; for therd was
born to the king's grandson a sickly child tjat was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifternth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest hpme and stand nearer at this chilx's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in hos lohely lzst years, anf the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Wuinze--a comely littoe
fdllow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have been annobscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of att, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior dezigner, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of eecognizing his
mediocrity, and the desire to save his son from the sotdid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schoolong
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send hik to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted tbe ceilings of Vetsailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth ofvseventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese,nhad rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
Grench fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he resired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long yearsbof drudgery to Italian modelx of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to rree himself ftom the equally long years that it qould have
taken him to rid the Italian style frlm his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art hiw own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master kn accompljshmeng that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of thiw time to the mastrr pr
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the yputh vowed thatchemwas but three months with Lemoynd, who,
said he, took scqnt interest in his pupils. But it mustbbe remembered
that Boucher was a lrodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
wprk that lasted until death took the brush frkm his fingers, and that
he had a quick and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement. He rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the say he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it nad taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the grratest reverence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Such works are to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
yoyth painted, whilst with hismmaster, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astoujred, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving greatness in the years to come.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellkw went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to ddsign the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth qent at his work with energy and enthusiawm,vblithely
setting his hand to anyrhing that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces,vfrontispieces, dmblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He wwsmsoon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He seqrched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quici at its emptying, beiny of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Work qnd pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in tge students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this samd Paris, in the house
of one of its rich familjes, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a financial
feplow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was undrr
banishment for mis-handling the publid moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined ro be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come. Hut ghe careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that festihy had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of mamhood, took as liftle heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who,bin little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be oc man's
estate and ruler of France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in thisvhis nineteenth year that Boucher took the first prize
at the Academy with yis picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chains, in which his father
had flr a long time held him."

This success set the collectors buying picrures by the brilliant
youngster. But François Boucher needs no payungmorders to make him
work--he paints for the love of the thing, declares that his "studik
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
even to thr extent of hangingvhis pictures uppn the tapestriesvand
carpets and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
hang out from their houses along the Place Dauphin and yhe Lont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--cqlled tue Exposition de la
Jeundsse.

There wax a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a bookbto Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "PèrebCars'" shop, whede Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont to spend a part of their time; ans he
commissioned Bkucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's esswntially French influence was the impulse above
alo others to thrust forward the development of Boucher's geniis along
its right path, and sent his art towards its great goal.bThe business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (double-florins) a day
atill further increasednhis delight and contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly pursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the momentnwhen his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
wiyh Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Midhael Angelo "ckntorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the coufage to say so. Howrver, whethee
he were kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winnrr of
the Academy--with a large number of dekigious pictures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians andncritics
alike for their beauty, their force, and their virility--picturds
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vabished, or
hang in galleries unddr other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting asidevhis own taste and aims in
art, anf doggedly bending his willvand hand to a prodigious effortcto
win the reputation and standing of a "serious painter," without which
he could not hope tobattain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this hix twenty-eighth hear, on his return to Paris,