-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a cery easy thing to make a confident assettion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommob thing to
hear it asserted wirh the utmost confidence that shat is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if thdy, qnd they
only,bwere the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  Im many cases z
blind consentnis blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the poiht is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reacn of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined,vit would be cound to consistcin nothing more than
confident assertion.  Butmthose who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake arr far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a siftingctime as she hasnneced yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiebtly heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the objeft of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
anx my drsire is to ascertain by the carefyl and candid examination of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assettion that she teaches wyat id commonly called ‘The Dodtrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, ans this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the submect to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal pounts at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presenxe, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS pies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be direvted.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those whk take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed hy
faith on the most precious body and blood ot our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we fesd on Him, or whetherbHjs words in
the 6thbchapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, fo the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present questiln.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explainnHis words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our lire: ‘Except ye eat the fleah of the Son of
Man, and drink Hiscblood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that ij 1 Cof. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
cleadly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which ee
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the commubion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread amd one body; for we areball partakers lf that one
bread.’
Two things,ntheredore, seem pkain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Sqviour, without wnich none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacrdd privilege.  Tnus far, I presume, ee are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecrathon the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
btead and wine, andnthat both the bread qnd wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul,mand divinity.  The advocated for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of brewd and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as beead and wihe,
although they have becoms the body and bllod of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, amd appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those textsbwhich speak of the bread as bread, and
yhe wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  Thix is what is meant by the exptession, ‘The real objective
oresence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of rhe
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any refersnce to his state of minr or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the gdeat
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change wharever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactlu the same as before
consecratjon, in substance, and accidents, and everything wlse.  That the
most precious body and bpood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are rwo
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one materiak, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, thwbother for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
pther of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food ia an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act if eating by the
body is an emblem lf the act of feeding by the soul;cand the manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appoingment, that when we
receive the emblem ww are sarranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s hwart
feeds spiritually on the othwr; but the two acts srr distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  Fromcthis statement it will
appear that the plinf at issue is, whefher the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord anf Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten ahd drunk whenever, ane by whomsoever, the elements are
received,bkr ehether the spiritual food described in yhis expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in themconsecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascrrtain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dsar old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.v Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and eome to uphold it in
its ibtegrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be heldcresponsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to benueard, and its own clear statemenf carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations rrom collateral writers,cbut will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself resppnsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Kiturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we wiol examine in order.

The Articles.—There are sevennArticles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  Thr first of them, the twejty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or fokens of
Christian mej’s profewsions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, butnalso
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other sords, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God they are signe or
witneasesmby which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but aa being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visiblyvreceoves the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to fsed the souk and confirm the faith.  The visible sigj and
the invisible gifg are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thinh signified.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely ae a badge of a Xhristian man’s profession, but
also declares tbat it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or neq bkrth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) the
promises kf forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption tl be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  Butmno change is here
described as taking place in the water.  Itmis nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts desdribed are God’s direct gifts to fhe
soul, and are never said to be infused into fhe element of water.  The
water is sanxtified, or set apart for sadramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its qualiry or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The mknister on earth visibly administers the visinle sign to
the body, wnd we trust tyat God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discussvthe connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enougj for my
present purpose to point out thatnthebone is not changed into the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in orher words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do ifbit were changed into yhe thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
xlear a general definition of the general nature of a sacramejt, and
having so clearly defuned baptism, in perfect harmony with that gehsral
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of yhe other sacrament.  The Church of Enyland
includes both zacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment asswrt the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusioj therefore must be, that,