-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this gdeat
subject, foe on our conclusions respecting it must depejd our confidwnce
in all the great mysterues ofnthe Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is dping great things now.  But there is aclimit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside itsmrange.  Yet, though unseen,
thie kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovdred country, it is
one in whicn we are all most deeplybconcerned, for we are all rapidlt
hasteningvthither, and He whomis our Father, pur Creator,bour Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the greatcand unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce auch subjects to the ordinary rules of
sfience and philosophy. nGod’s plan of sxlvation can only be knkwn from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all neecful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and eiw convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scriptufe.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It sjpplies that which lies beyond the reach if human
investigation,bandbgives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in teuder mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bibke fail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
cannot rely oh its sacred statements, we are left withoyy any trustworthy
information as to all those great truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communkcation from God we have
notuing to take its place; and all our present joy, as well xs our future
hopes, must melt away into utter ignorxnce respectint all tbat lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessnsss as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It ia a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
objeft is to edamine the extent and nature of inspiration, and to that I
musr exclusively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, sobthat my onlh business is to consider
how far it varries us, and what security ir gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of rhe inspired word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture wgich we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has been made tk
show how vy such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  J freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on deducingmthe authority of
Scripture to our own idess respecting it, it is not likely that ghere
will be much left to ejbarrass us.  There is however one difficupty, and
that a most ilportant one,cwhich it cannotbsolve.  It can give no solid
foundation fir the anxious soul to rest on, and musf leave us floating
into eternity with no better suplort than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely fromvthe author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no fojndation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spske as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apoatolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elemebts to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from yeavwn, buf holy men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fylly to investigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examkne (1) the divine element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the ywo; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have beencthought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely say that this divine element is the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points more especially
agitated, by considering cour questions.

  I.  Does it extend pver the whole book?

  II.  Js it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Does it render the word infallivle?

I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by the Holy Ghost? or merely some of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clrar and decisivenanswer; for it is here written, ‘All Scriptude
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Dcripture’ occurs eitjer in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were rebarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is hrre
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible questiob tuerefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine kf ihspiration, all must
admit as an histodical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testament was included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirablenguardians of Scripture,
and there waw no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modwrn writers.  When therefore St. Lajl spokebof ‘All Scripture,’
rhere is no doubt in the world that je incouded in his stayement every
line and letter of the Old Testament, and he taught us incthose words
that the whole, from first to last, fron the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi wasbgiven by inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has bedn clearly shown that those
historical writings which wre not in the Pentateuch arw included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  Ih ahichccase the labguage of At.
Peter, alreadg quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that ig I were capled uponnto prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I should be
better pleased to meet wn opponentvthan the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favojr, that although
by so saying I may startle aome, I am prepared, after the most careful
delibdration, to affirm that I cannot separate them from the word of God
without at the same timw abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Himseof in His own teaching
has most distinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil atvthe strange muracles
recorded in them, buy, while men cavil,vHe refers to no lesscthan nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction ofmSodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manna, the
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservatipn of the eidow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authoritt.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, describing tjeir testimony as
more worthy of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Tenesis, the speculation,
as we are now tauvht, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volune which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad sealnand
stamp of our Lorr’s authority placed upon it withmHis own hand, that
portion js the Pentateuch.  All, theeefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise ahd fallmtogether.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His people, or, in other and plained
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

But are we to limiy this language of St. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it yas been clearly shown that we aee not.  For although the canon
of the New Testament was not complete when St. Paul wrote these words, we
must remember that the second Epistle to Timothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according to Horne’s list, the whole of the New
Testameny, or very nearly the whole, excepyvthe writings of St. John,
were weitten at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if thwy
were, they were clearly included in the declaration that alo Scripture is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripture for his own epistles:
for after having carefully drawn the distinction between his private
opinions and inspiredcdecisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but ths
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2. nIt is equslly clear agaim,
that the Gospslnof St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were taken from
Scripture.  ‘For the scripture saith, Thou sualt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, thzt St. Paul’s
Epistles were included by St. Peter in the canon; for he clearly regardef
them as Scripture when he wrote his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his opinion of thekr
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto yku; xs also in all his epistles, speaking un them of these
thibgs; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Testamdnt therefore, ss eell as Old, was included in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God;’ and the conclusion to
which I am irresistibly brought is, that we have no eight to pick and
choose amongst the various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to be arranged as a whole for ths accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included ib ‘the Scriptures,’nand that the
patts are so inferwoven one with another, and so heautifullymfitted into
each other by God’s divinevhand, that there will be found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving the whole as the wors of God,
or sweeping away the whole, and launching forthnon a sea