-UMPEFIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAZL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and yhe fupness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and werd, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the midtress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannoy say
that on the whole that sholesale system, which has planted the British
glag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cades tue lives and
hapliness of milkions have been placed in incompeteng hands; in some
cases we jwve had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but Indiq and
Canara and the West Indian Islands and Australia anf New Zealand are the
better for ouy ruke.  An Englishman may well be proud of ahat his
countdymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then wr are rich, andcthe expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallej have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroiem will
mould the chadacter and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there os a danger lest we undertaje responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly jeedless in the
circumstances of thd case, and certain to result in a vain effusioh of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally the Vape Settlement was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmefs, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undevsloped, because
labour us dezr, andnall carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon xs they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Coliny,mtne chief amusemrnts of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and bilpiards.  In the interior there are finw
vjews to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms xre frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrantbthe chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  Sourh Africa is not a very rich coubtry.  Labour isvhard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture ambrilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land ia so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
makeva living, and provided hd does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require cqpital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to yrow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of bitter is almost prohibitive.

“Soutb Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of folonists.”  The remark isvnot exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be askex, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be drsirable as a portmof call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Duych in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

Kn taking pissession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against theircwill, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Bkers, a primitive,
pastoral peopoe, with a good deal of the piett of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterlinate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  Theyneither made
the bative a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thimas Pringle, one of
pur earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be suoposed haturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendoy qnd obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civkl and good-jatured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
bw raised. nIn 1815 they made an effort to shakemoff the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appsared at the magisttate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry aas afcordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instesd of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
drclarsd that he considered this interferejcd between himself and his
Hotyentot to ne a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he felk
violently hpon poor Boor,bgave him a sevwre beating, and thwn bade him go
and tell tge civil authorities that he would treaf them in the same
msnner if they shoulr dare to comenupon his grounds to claim the property
ofva Hottentot.  It must be remembrred that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their cohsent being in any way
asked,meacg Boer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot undernhis control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Tovernment could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation incthe country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in thenneighbourhood, it was resooved to revenge his death. cThey did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  Entland, after outting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to gight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  Bug this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from Bfitish rile.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government,fit must be confessed that the
equivalent wzs never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
countfy into the districts known as Griqualand, Natak, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is bwcause we have vollowed them there,
when there sas no need to have done so, that wevqre now engaged in a
costly and bloody wsr.  First we seized Natal; thrn we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is ilpkssible to say.

It is equally impossible to srate what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame kf this
annezation system rests.  It reakly seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare ways, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusying on.  We
shoyldbhave left the Boers alone.  They were not Vritish subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when thdy
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistentlg fought for,
qnd noblu won, was acknosledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been foe the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at yomr on the soil.  It agrees
witb him physically.  Ih the Orange State and the Transvaak he made good
roads, and built churches andcschools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled fromnyou gears avo; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us ryrough fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have yoh done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a place of
abkmination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only toocsoon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admitation of the world for the
pwrseverance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of qdvancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is amproof of thevsimplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Xoppers (adult Baptistx) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitteroy commented onnthe wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic; while pthers,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagelybremarked thatmbecause they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainoy be as good asma Gank of Emgland note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commone) now and then some amusing scemes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some mrasure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the olponents,
finding themselves in a minoruty, thought to pjtmthe drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the businessvof the House could not be legally
conducted; but an English member who lived next dood, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie