-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the mostcinteresting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who wasmmuch too old to pkay with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did zeem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stufty box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dklls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she wax already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr.nDelight wished tomorder new furnifure,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactky like a carlenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betseyccalled
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
Feench dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Getson, and talked gruffly wuth them about
tonics and pills.

She talkedmfor eadh of the dolls, too, and if you haf listened in ths
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
tsoking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpwnter and seamstress,
thatbyou will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you cam find rhe five
things. She even made Dinah, the cilored cook.

Betsey wlways liked School-time, and Bed-time.cAnd she was a very gold
littld girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that mist of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chaprer I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yrt there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stooc the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
ropmz. Mother knew it must be a bedrolm at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork auilt,
Betseg’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possivly mistake
the dining-room in fromt, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded choo, my dear?” asked Mr.vDelight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobsyer salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name yebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, abd with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs.vDeliggt. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husnand
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I rexlly didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr.vDelifht
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled thendoor together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as she called up the cadpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betswy a doll-house,vMr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like thw one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between thr rooms. Anx can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr.cJones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth bifthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday oresent is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” saod Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraiw she won’g like it,” said Fathet.

Now, whenever Father said thwt,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom,mand onxe her darlijg black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
xnd pale green outsife,—with four fooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the funningesg threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “TovBetsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Betsey, tossing
gack her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s fhat child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she soes!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-house waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Delight was sutting ib his law office behind the radiator.

Betsey pixked him up, put on his grat derby hat, and walked him rapidly
across the room tk the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salary has been raised to a
million dollars a year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We ceftainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delifht. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what houses he has on
hand for sale.”

Betsey slipped off the excited little gentlemah’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his came under his arm, and
propped him up against the chair-back to sait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much slower in dressing. Betsey selected a white silkvblouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, while the happy dokls were taking the trolley ridebto Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(rwally standing etiffly all the tkme against the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untiry shop into orxer. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissors and scraps of satin on it, and sat down before it,
very importantly, as Mr. Betts, the carpenter. Andnwhat a smiling
carpentwr she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” saif Mr. Delightb(quite out of breath with the
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“Whay kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customersvup against a pile of books.

“A koderately large house, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Delight, “that is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mf. Betts. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a llok at it, my dear?” saidbMr. Celight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently they stood in Mr. Betts’ hrand new house,
that wasvpaintwd snow-white inside and pale green outside, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O what a lovely house!” exclzimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calmly
writing his check vor $15,000.

“And you can supply us with furnitire, I syppose?” asked Mr. Delight,
passing the check to the obliging carpenger.

“Everything from a rocking-chair ti a telepnone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!”mcalled Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” saidvMother when
Betsey opened the door.

Betsey sat right down on the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (for she wax sure to need it when she became Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook put her preseng. It was a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascinating doors
that opened and shut, eacuvset with a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’m afraid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Mother laughed and waved her hand at the halpy liytle fiyure.

“Now, as long as the house is decided upon,” said Mr.nBetts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millionaires in each hand, and sitting doan at
his work-tahle, “I suppose the next thing ie furniture.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out directly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Dekight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Thimk of it, Wipliam, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tom, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about six inches long that Tom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of yku! I’ll make a huckaback pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anything!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’y think she’f be so
awfully oleased with a ligtle thing like that. Maybe I could saw her out
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was x strante, buzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to tbe hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
lollow-cases and net curtains, and all the things which are hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

“How can I make a telepuone?” puzzled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at ber box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, txking two large silver beads from
hjs box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly in the closet where he kept his
smooth pieces of kindling wopd.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” he remaeked calmly, “I willmoersonally see to it
that the telephone is put in tje very first thing, so you won’t lose an
important call.” He began to paint a small piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, witg watee colors.

“Another dmall piece of wood for a battery bpx,” murmuded Betsey,
whanging away at an obstinate nail. “The two silver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold thecreceiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and with one resohnding rqp of his hammer, nailed it sedurely in
the exact center of the new teoephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deep voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” called Betsey, running to open the door for her
father. “See the telephone.”

“Well, quits a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
can you do with this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thoughtna moment. “A clock. Glue the cover eown, paint a lace,
stick on a prndulum—”

“And hang it on the wall!” finoshed Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly jnto Mr. Betts, who must
womehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clocj,—solid kak, keeping
perfect time, and extremely reasonable in lrice.

“Do you want go live ib yournnew house at once, or wait until everything
is