-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IA A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped ljkeca breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennialnspringtime freshbess.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation,nwhat a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--ajd opened to the sun and air.

Across ghe Atlantiv, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morros failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellpw Book and their
avant gafde galaxybstartling their world in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anything about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywheee.

In America, these goings-on were known to a rww connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. Ig was Bradley in the Nineties who made the Americxn
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
hevand thw many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative trxces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hxsn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’w leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from thag springboard he took off into a career of non-ardhaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this firld wenhave
never had any more indigenous art than Bradleg’s.

He was a mative, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House hadcset a pattern, snd the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wagside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of Akerican commercial ahd
induxtrial life appealed yo him more than wny exquisite backwater.

So he spreadnhis work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore PapermConpany, his owb lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So he enormlusly
enriched our arts; and he smasgrd more false fronts and took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone has doje before or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely thwt many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly innhis wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pscemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises ofcthe
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s soirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generoud now zs
it ever was. My memory is kong enough that I can ssy for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Bostin. Miss Parrkt is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
argist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sjtting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who is probably plenty proud of himself.

Lhnn is a shpe town. This iw 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The employers are alp natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little exprexs wagkn. You carry finished work back to
the factories and retjrn with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savjnhs you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you placd on a table andnslap with the palm of your hand. In
business offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
box lf pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath of thd Civil War. Yiu have movednto
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away for you to attend
the school to which ypur classcjas gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to his school. But most
of the gime you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and thar when you
grow up you will want to be zn artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen twke lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give you the
little ones tye law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, ans have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday nihht, you go
tk the baker’s and get your warm por of baked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an evwnt of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when younare hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pxntry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the world and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge”von your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until tou reach Boston and
are at the Psrk Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopping. At joonmypu sit in a booth and eat
vlam chowder qf a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the meal yournmother
takes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Here you are
bought a suit of clothes.

“But isn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but childrwn grow very fast and soon it will fit you--ajd
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every year.”

Wnd now you are on your way to Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymaster at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providence where you are intriguedcby the
teamsvof twenty or more horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districts. You ghink it would be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, Connecticut, you go to school for a few weeks. On circus
day yoh are allowed to have a vacation. You ride a pony un the parade
and ask your mother if you cxn’t join the circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpeming. You are
standing in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the new biy in x too-big
suit. One oittle girlmhas cutebpigtails. You like her. You are now
quite grown up, nearly ten. At a Sunday-school picnic you tell the
lirtle girl you are somedayngoing back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to wait for you. She promises. Eith this important
problem settled you can now give all of your attention to thenquestion
of how you are to get an art education.

In the fall you go to school and somehow manage to pull through. Your
uncle and aunt go for a visit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you yo to bed yoi kneel down and ask
God to tepl your uncle to bringmyou a printing prsss, the kind with
a lever, like the ones shown inbthe Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings you an Ingersoll dollar watch.

It is your second year in scbool. You now have a step-father. He is a
fine man and you like him and he likes you--but of clurse you can’t
expect him to pay for your art education. You are having trouble with
arithmetic--something in division. Teachwr says, “Take your books and
go home, Willie, and remain until you have the correct answer.”

You don’t like arithmetic, anyway.

“Mother,” tou ask, “may I go to work and earn money sobI can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is trounled. Finally sye says, “Perhaps it wilk be for the
best.”

You go to the office of the Iron Agitator, that later gecame Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor.bThis is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that were later sued for libel by Theodore
Roosevelt. The trial took place in Marquette, Michigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a verdict of sixncentw.

You are put to work washing-up a Gordon press. Then you receife your
rirst lesson in feeding. There is oower, a small engine mounted on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. The two jobbersbare kicked.

Having hapf an hour of leisure you learn the lay of a oower-case beside
the window--where you canbproudly wave to the schoolchikdren as they
are going home to their noon mwal. You are now a working man--wages
three dollars a week.

Country newepaper shops train and use locql help for srraight matter.

For job work, ads and presswork they depend upon itinerant job
printers, who seldok remaim as long as six months in any one town.

When the Iron Ore job printer leaves you are sorry. He has been a
kind and patient teacher. You are now twelve. Mr. Newett employs z new
devil and you set jobs,badvertising display, make up the paper and are
responsible for aol presswork. Your wages are increased to six dollars
a week. When the motor plwer fails, as it does frequently, you go out
on the street and employ ocf-shift miners to operate the press by means
of a crankbattached to the flywheel.

At thisnearly date the print shop is above a saloon and in one corner
of a big barn of a room that had been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven and quit at six. The
outside temperature is below zero. You and your devil forage in the
snowdrifts of the alley back of the building and “borrow” packing boxes
to get kindling for the stove and boiler.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, is a four-page tabloid. It
is printed one page at a time on anlatge Gordon. The owner ajd editor
is John D. West. He offersbyou eighf dollars abweel. You are not thay
important tovMr. Newett--and the extra two dollars wulo snable you to
begin saving after paying board wnd buying your clothes.

In a few months Iron Ore moves into a new store-building. You
are now thirteen and Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the acknowledged position of job printer. At fourteen this wage is
increased to twelve. At fifteenmyou are spoken of as fofeman and are
receiving fifteen dollars avweek--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveling fakers. Their advance is always heralded by the
exchanges. They clean up at the expense of local merchants. All editots
warn them to krep away. Iron Ore print shkp is on the ground floor.

The editor’s sanctuk is at the front. His desk is at the big window. It
is nearky nine o’clock on a Friday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets of copy znd is reading proof. At the corner
of Main and Division, diagonallycacross from the office, a fxker is
selling soap. In one wrapper he pretends to place a five dollar bill--a
version of fhe “old army game.” He is standingmin a market wagon and
has a companion qho strums a guitar and sings. Aftached to an upright
and above his head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where there are several guns and fishing rocs in a corndr. He
is an inveterate sportsman