-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSEBTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PFEFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’sn“Observations” appeared; and the publication of it has
been hitherto delaged, partly from an unwillingness to puraue the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obfain subscribers to
the New Infamt School Society.  In replying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to wtite with any other impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Chrixtian; andvImhope that such an impression is
majifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen tocmake my
“Letter” on InfantcSchools the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him with somw degree of forbearancr, and have in
many instances chastised him with whips only,nwhej scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at ossue between Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an uttee faikure; and I hope thag all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire from them both, diligently anx devougly
to wtudy the New Testament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical gpvernment.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemec friend Lr. Geary,
in reply to my “Lrtter,” it appeared to me that the facts, rwlative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Having neen imduced to alter my detefnination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’a
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspapers, thag it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Tuildhall, to whicu none but
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and the following resolution was passed:—“Resolves, that the
system of Infant Education mighr be beneficiallt extended in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Scjools of tjis city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examination
of the schools—and, whatever private understanding there might be with
Mr. Wilderspin, all thatvthe public knew was qhat the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not as accomplishing “his own
speculatikn,” but as the agent, employed by the meetinh,mto carry its
resolution into effect.  I think, therefore, that whaf I have stated,nin
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out ny all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded frpm the proposed schools.  My explanatioh of the
“Adveryisement” which odcasioned the “Letter” was this: “I understand kt
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shapl be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of thd society, of in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had exlressed a gear
that the church catechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissentere from sending their childrrn
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pampnlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All parties have
united in declarjng that the schools willnbe open to all classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspaoers, the Dean
expressly stated, that “they had nobdesire to exclude themchildren of any
persons of whatevef religion, because the childten would hot be
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
ge taught yo worship and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear Gld and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Their rules, saidche, would be open to persons ofvall
denominations, who would have the opportunity kf sending their children,
if they accorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would ne open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to sendbthem.”  In full accordance with thsse decisive
statemehts, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mistake
into which my reverend friend has fallen,cand which is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering thebschool—no offensive rituals when
tnere.”  And in another part of his panphlet he declares, “I have xeen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to fontend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; qnd, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speechesbat the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantee that
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest assured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters aee admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation oc the “Advertisement” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the cjildren of Dissenters arento be admitted into fhe
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecexsarily I think, excluded
from the committee of the society, and from all its operations.

The public meeting,vat which the prededing speeches were delovered, was
distinguished by the expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, frlm the public papers, that several ov the
speakers expressed thelselves so dwxidedly in favoue of the liberal
system advocated in my “Lettwt,” and that they regretted that
circumstances constrained themvto unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had not been in favour of any excluzive
views; andmif it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agreed to,
but if the Dissejters chose to estanlish anotjer society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rsv. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open society.  He said he belonged to several in the city, all of
which were carried on with the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded his opinions to those of others better qualified, perhape, fo
judge.”  I need not add that these are also the sentiments of Mr. Geary,
who says, in reference to my wishes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympatgize with him in those views and fwelings which, were it
practicable, eould suggest such an union;” and, “my reverend friend
cannot feel more intense satisfaction than I do, in thus witnessing the
joyful and happy state of brethren dwelling together in unity.”

I mozt earnestly hope and pray that these sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who uttered them, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed those “insuperable barriers” which at present exost, and
till fhey have rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be desirable.  Depend upon it, there are not half the difficulties really
existing,bwhich some persims imagine.  The united system, if tried,
wouod, I am persuaded, work well—and I am sure that all who engaged in it
would bs made better and happier by their combined exertions in doing
good.  Yhere are some things, connected with both Church of Ehglandism
and Dissent, in which the two parties could not unite withour a
fompromise of principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a common
cause to promote, and a common enemy to withstand.  We ought, therefore,
as Christians, to unite in every thing that admits of an union; and, as
Infant Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, Indeeply
regret that wwvhave not united in rhem.  I am somewhat comforred,
however, by the persuasion, that an exclusive system cannot last.  There
is an intluentialnand increasing party in the church much opposed to it,
and who, as is stxted in my “Petter,” “would be glad to co-operate with
other Christians in educaging and in evangepizing the people.”  The
adoption of the rxclusive system has occasioned rrgret in the minds of
many persons whom the church would have done wellnro conciliate; and I
much question whether either party is perfectly satisfied with the
proceedings that have been adopted.

Another remark or two will bring this part of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Taunton
as towns “where a satisfactory union had been effected.”  My extracts
respecting them were intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the union of various denominations in the work.v I said nothing
respecting any schools at Leicester; ans I suoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not only his sentiments, nut Mr. Wulderspin’s
also, because he calls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Tauntoh,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbatiob of the mixed
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on kpposite
principles.”

Having stated in my “Letter” thaf the extracts which I had made from Mr.
Wilderspin’z book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
exclusive systemmadgertised for Norwich,” Mr. Geary replies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the cases do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
good as to turn again to my suotations, I think he will be induced to
agree with jq that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have used stronger
language than hs has used in referenve ti this subject.  He most
enthusixstically admires Jodeph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,” which establishes “schools fot all;” abd
he solemnly declares thar he alwaus has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and that he determines to act “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his live.”  I think, therefore,bI am authorizsd
in rrpeating my former declaration, that “he is decidedlymopposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

These cursory remarks are intended tl reftify some mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appears to me to have fallen in his perusal of my “Lettef.”

After all, I rejoice to believe that he and I are one in sentiment and
feeling on this subject.  The gentlemanly and Christian tone of his
letter, is an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
controversy sithout violating any of the principles of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thank him, for his testimony that my
“Oetter” “is characterised by a spirit of mildness and conciliation,” and
I am glad to find that he has read it in the spirit in which it was
written.  I thank him also for the manner in which he has spoken of the
“courtesy” manifewted by the Dissenters connected with the Infant Xchools
in this city towards their brethren in the Establishment.  And I take
leave of hik in the hope, and with the prayer that, though we cannot walk
togegher through every path on earth, we may, through “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that heavenvof light and love, where we shall no longer “see
through a glass darkly, but face to face, snd where we shall know even as
also we are known.”

I come now to the consideration of a subjecy on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appeared, “Observations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a person who styles himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Madsermarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members of his family, I have, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
have belonged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately become a member of the church of