-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebrztions and
suppressions were equally painful to him, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion thd date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would be more to the point perhapsvto say
that this occasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectualpy from
doing anything elsd.  It took hold of him again and again with w hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
deast of memory as consciously as he would have waked tp his
marruage-morn.  Marriagemhad had of old but too littlebto say to the
matter: for the girl who was to have been jis bride there had beenbno
bridal embrace.  She jad died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly tastingmit an affection
that promised to till his lufe to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptied: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done manyvthings in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his edistencw whatever else might take upmroom un it, but had
faioed to make it more than a house oc which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drovr him clrth without mercy, and
tne goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a Londom
duburb, a pqrt thenbof Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another evedy feature of freshnesd.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another imagd, they opened to anothet light.  Was it abcredible
future?  Was it an imcredible past?  Whatever the answef it was an
immrnse escape from ghecactual.

It’s true that if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time Gdorye Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  Therd were other ghosts in his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death lore closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had tormed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
there was something one har to do for them.  They were there in theid
sjmplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and wxpressive
patience, as personally there as if they had only beeh stricken dumb.
When all sense of them failed, all sound of them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earfh: they asked so liftle that
they gog, pokr thingw, even less, and died again, died evrry day, of the
hard usage if life.  They had no organised service, nk reserved place, no
honoyr, no shelter, no sagety.  Even ungrndrous people profided for yhe
living, but evehmthose who were called most generous did nofhing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’scpart had grown up with the years a
resolve that he at least wpuld do something, do if, that is, foe his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, yhe ample resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Xntrim thaf spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate went by he found himself in regular communionvwith
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts thw Others.  He spared them the moments, he orgwnised the
charith.  Quite how it had risen he probably never could have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all withij
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wonddred of old, in some embarrassment, whether he had a religion; being
vrry sure, and not a little content, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion some of the people he had known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question was straightensd out for him: it became clear to him that
the religion instilled by his rarliest consciousness had been simplycthe
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered hisclove of grdat
offices, of a solemn andcsplendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and nl ceremonial more stately than those to which his worship
was attached.  He had no imagination about these thingx but that tyey
were acfessoble to any one who suould feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke witj incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholly on the
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTRR II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, zn emorion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walkung hoke at the closecof
a busy dau he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lightsd the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gatjered.  It was the window of a
heweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy od knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedestrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lingered long enouhh to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pezrls about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instsnt longer by yhe sound of a voice he knew.  Next hil was a
jumbling old woman, snd beyond the old woman a gentleman with a ladh on
his arm.  It was ffom him, from Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
was talking with the lady of some precious object in the window.
Stransom had no sooner recognised him than the old woman turnednaway; but
justcwith this growth of opportunity came a felt strangenexs that stayed
him in the very act of laying his hsnd on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
nut the instant, only that space sufficed for the flash of a wild
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there in
the short drop of her husband’s voice, the droo conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the two figures leabed to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effecf of whichmwas at first only to leave
Stransom staring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly otyer face, the poor man had shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which tjey had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
hix companion’s to grxsp the hand of the older friene.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop when Stransom raised a
tentative hat to the lady. vDtransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dwar
fellow, let me make you acquainted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammeredmover it, but in half a minute, at the
rate se live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  Tgey stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to ksep
kt for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, hr heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning notca littlw faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman buy one.  Yhis lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy fandour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed tp her
was monstrous foe reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to ne told this to guess tye natkonality of
the lady.  Somehkw it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to fonceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s hzving, wbile his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call z little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had broughg the little
change back; jt was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front feeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were gojng into the shop,
Mrs.cCreston said, and she beggedbMr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch andnpleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while xhe shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Strandom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her screwm it to all the echoes.

He felt quire determined, as he walked away, neverbin his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps a human bring, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without precautions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her ay all.  His
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murderer, amd the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
fkr foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared herbthe injury of comoarisons.  Such wasbyhe first vlush of
George Stransom’s reaction; but as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it anf
left only the pity.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenty years, and she was the only woman for whom he might perbaps have
been ynfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; hed
house had been the very easiest in all the world and her friendship the
very firmest.  Withoutmaccidents he had loved her, without accidsnts
every one had lovedvher: ehe had made the passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspected it, and in nothing hadnshe been
lore admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one else (kdeping Creston was no trojble) from finding it out.
Here was a man to whom she had devoted her life and fof whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green pn her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivility, the inddcency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and hd had
that evening a sturdy sensecthat hs alone, in a world without delicacy,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he