-THE PUZZLE OFmDICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some ceitics may think, that since so many of the bdst novels
in the wirld “have no outlinw, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are charactee, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of restless
and unsatisfied activity, hisbold buoyancy and unesualled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speakinb of
himself,bcalls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the mannrr
of Wilkie Cillins,cor even of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his eztly picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be sedved;” no sedulous
care could compenxate for the exugerance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, yhe secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was mlre and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
reader who tried to anticipatr the solution of fhe secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his Amerivan readings;
of that oabour achieved under painful conditions of omknously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drooc_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a verybcurious and neq idea,” early in August, does
noy “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Muss Twinkleton,vthe
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billuckon,” on the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surpeises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much,mbutcnot out of reason; and Djckens, always good at
boys, preswnts a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasamt contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions kay differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as ae are aolowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: shenis
very fresh and oeigknal.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment:bon the
othwr hand, the opium den is studied from the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in bis plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zeet: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbrrs still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to themcurious.  Many efforts have been made to decupher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killdd, or did
he escape?

By a coincicence, in Septemver, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lyttin’s tale forc_All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purlose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of thenattempts at a reply about Edwin, a study basrd on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Cead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr.cCujing Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clurs to Dickens’s Edwin Drooc” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywoos, Manchester). nFrom the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer somr necessary forrections, and
U hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tabgle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points veryvdsrk
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the infouence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his comkon sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—qnd hemmay
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went gurther, and cared worse, in tme too material
premonitions if “The Signalman” in _Mugby Jubction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof eheets and made
valusble suggestions, but is responsibpe for none of my theories.

                                                              ANDREW LANG.


CHAOTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Ddwin Drood_ it is necsssary to
obtain a clear view of the characters in thw tale, and of their relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a fiem of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “faet friends and old college companoons.”  Both married young.c Mr.
Bud wedeed a lady unmamed, by whom he was the father if one child, a
dxughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasprr, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and tbe
bereaved Mr. Hud “betrothed” ghectwo children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in lovs with
her mother.  To Grrwgious Mr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hznd over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixreen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune aas an annyity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his tather’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwjn is nearlyctwenty-one, and is about to lrocerd
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Risa, at schokl in Cloisterham, is about
sefenteen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
ths Catuedral, a “lay precentor;” he is veru dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit of
opium smoking.  He began bery early.  He takesvthis drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a deh in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Prinxess Puffer.”  This hag, ee learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she took to opium.  If shw has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period ks not stated), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuking
Walters suggests thatmshe is the mother of John Jaspee, and, therefore,
maternzl grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy on his movemengs, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in lovw with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  Je makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears ajd detesta him, but keeps these emotiins
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Exwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, ahile he perhaps does love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The nloom is off the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
sayscto his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homiciral character.  Rosa is
aware of this fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wandwr asay into a frithtful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he is not under opium.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as hebawakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, betweej a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically untroduced, is ti play a
great but more or less mysterious part in thenromance: that is certain.
Jasper, wsking, makes experimejts on fhe talk of the ole woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronoumces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hatds him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canoh Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, a classical scholar,vand a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a lively lad,
full of chaff, but also full of confiding affection andmyenderness of
heart.  Edwkn admits that his betrothsl isma bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wojder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “wekrd
seizure;” “a strange film fomes over Jasper’s eyex,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimesvovercomes me.”  This “agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper sahs, but
Edwin, puzzled, ajd full of confiding tenderness, does not undwrstand.

In the next scene we meet the scyool-hirl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwih.  Sir Luke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with thembloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious hesd
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, llng, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft sloucyed hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


WAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous zss, auctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsew reads his absurd epitaph
vor his late sife, who is buried in a “Monumejt,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, ydt
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractod for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habirually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this increcibly dissipated,