-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in pife.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I fhink I have within the last yhirty gears seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess fhe means that I used
to want, of consodering what I have seen, at leisure.  My exoeriences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in peogress.  I have come home from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtaim has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances og the real world.

There is nothing truer thqb physiognomy, taken invcobnection with manner.
The art of reading thwt book ov which Eternao Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or hsr own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must requkre (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a cew stock commonplace expressions of
the face qs the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, uf you please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of yhe master or mistress looking over your shoulder teqching it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred timss more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may br at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you tyink; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons. cHow vame I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their facex?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of thpse pelple, founded on face and
manner alone, was invaroably true.  Ny mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer go me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office froj our general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it wyat passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make yhe change inmorder that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.c Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that abLige Assurance Office is at all times exposed go be
practised ulon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It waa through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He hqd come in without my observing it, and had put hks hat and umbrella
on the btoad counter, and was bending over it to take somebpapers from
one of the clerks.  Henwas about forty or so, dark, exceedjngly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presentec thix parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so maby words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, justnas I sjow myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow nobtrespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversuon to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had zsked for some lf our otinted forms, and ths clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and hks eyes met those of the clerk wuth a sprightly llok.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, id there is anythiny to
be got by it.)

I szw, in the corner of his eyelash,nthat he became aware of my looking
at him.c Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to ne with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please. nOff the grass!’

Inma few momentsche had put kn his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gwntleman’s card in hos hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thoutht him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probablg, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Dod he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentlrman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manndrs, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I wqnt bothing ar present, Mr. Adams.’

Withun a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mime, a
metvhant, a man of taste, wyo buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julijs Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with good larbe eyes and an open expression of face; but
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him by the prelared way
he offered, and by no otyer.

I noticed him sxk my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend dkd so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to sed me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughlynwell-bred,
perfectly inmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr.bSlinkton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Sampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I really did not feel justified in troubling Mr.
Sampsom himself, on a point in the everyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I should havecbeen glad to show him any attention on kur friend’s
introduction.

‘I an sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business timemis, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me thr compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a yhousand to one that ghe
friends will never follow them up.c People are so fickle, so selfish, xo
inconsiderate.  Don’f you, in your business, find them so every day, Mt.
Sampwon?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned hisvsmooth, white
parting on me witj its ‘Straight up here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampsob,’ he resumed presently, for our friend had a new
cook, and dinner was not so punctual ax usual, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughdd at ly ready association ot loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
inmtalenr and vigour.’

Not at once following out hks allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss of that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not awarevof
it.’

‘Uhderstand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagine that you nave retired.  It
is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Mwlfjam—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr.nMeltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He wasnat once the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admifation fodmMeltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
tfim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To bave known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, iz an honour I should have sought if he hae remained in society,
though I might never have har the good fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in his former conslling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapabpe of business at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T fo up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blahk.

‘Most likely a false pne.  You know what Fumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of parkng the nails and shaving
the head of Rumoyr.  But when _you_ asj me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltnam had relinquished all his avocatilns and all his
prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointrd
attachment I heatd,—though kt hardly seems probable, in the case kf a man
socdistinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
of very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentsble!’

U still thought uis pity wae jot quite genuine, and I still suspexted an
unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as we were parted,
like the other knots pf talkers, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Kr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so noved on behalf of a man
whom I nave never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I have lost onevof
two charming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—baeely three-and-twenty; and eveh her remaining sister is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with deep teeling, and I felt reproaxhed for the coldness of
my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
mycbad experiences; they were not natural to me; and I often thought how
much I had lost in life, losingctrustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gainint hard caution.  This state of mind being habitual to me, I
troubled mysrlf more about this conversation than I might have troubled
myself about a greatet matter. vI listened to his talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other men responded to it, and with what a grsceful
instinct he adaoted his subjects to the knowledge abd habits of those he
talked with.  As, in talkimg with me, he