-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of the great meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen. And we danced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning we were indisposed and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been made to decipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence, in September, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                                              ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it is necessary to
obtain a clear view of the characters in the tale, and of their relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old college companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whom he was the father of one child, a
daughter, Rosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, John Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was an annuity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearly twenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit of
opium smoking.  He began very early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she took to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period is not stated), she has been very disreputable
for twenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears and detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he perhaps does love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The bloom is off the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidant, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa is of a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of this fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he is not under opium.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, a classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a lively lad,
full of chaff, but also full of confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin admits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  This “agony,”
we learn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding tenderness, does not understand.

In the next scene we meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass, auctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wine, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absurd epitaph
for his late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipated,