Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decisive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

Two or three trees, broken by its fall, sprawled on the turf. Among this
débris was the missile; resembling nothing so much as a huge
crinoline. At the moment we reached the spot P.C. A581 was ordering it
off; and Henry Pearson, aged 28 (no fixed abode), and Martha Griffin,
aged 54, of Maybury Tenements, were circulating among the crowd offering
matches for sale. They have nothing to do with this story, but their
names and addresses make for verisimilitude; or at least, I hope so. In
case they do not, let me add that Mary Griffin wore a blue peignoir
which had seen better days, and Herbert Pearson's matches struck
everywhere except on the box.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everything else.  That the
most precious body and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord and Saviour are in the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsible for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this definition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to point out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that,