-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the author to take part in a movement
without precedent in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delight to stories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptied: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but had
failed to make it more than a house of which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another every feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another image, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score or more of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.