-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, American Minister, Canterville Chase,
every told him he was doing foolish thing, as there no
doubt at all the place haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who a man the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to the fact to Mr. Otis when they came discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since grandaunt, Dowager Duchess Bolton, was
frightened a fit, from which never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands placed as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound tell you, Mr. Otis, the ghost has been
seen by several members my family, well as the of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, is Fellow King's
College, Cambridge. After unfortunate the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in consequence the mysterious noises
that from corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered Minister, "I will take the furniture the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with our spry fellows
painting the Old World red, and your actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon if there were such a thing as ghost in
Europe, we'd have it a time in one of our public
museums, or on road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it resisted the overtures of enterprising impresarios. It
has been well for centuries, 1584 in fact, always
makes its appearance the death of any our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no thing, sir, as ghost, and I guess laws of Nature
are not be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind the house, right. Only you remember
I warned you."

A weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, West 53d Street, had been
a New York belle, was now a handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, a profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, respects, she
was quite English, and an example of we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by parents
in a moment patriotism, which he to regret, was a
fair-haired, good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American leading German at Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and in London well as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the were his weaknesses.

Otherwise he sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, and lovely a fawn, and with a freedom
in her large blue eyes. She a wonderful Amazon, and raced
old Lord Bilton on pony round the park, winning by length
and a half, in front the Achilles statue, huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her the spot, and was
sent back to Eton by his guardians, in of tears.

After Virginia came the twins, called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven from Ascot, nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis telegraphed for a waggonette meet them, and
they started on drive in spirits. It was a July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent the pinewoods. Now
and then they a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, burnished of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at the beech-trees as they went by,
and the scudded away the and mossy
knolls, in the air. As they entered the of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed the atmosphere, a great
flight of silently over heads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops rain had fallen.

Standing on the them was an woman, dressed
in silk, with cap and apron. This Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She them each a low
curtsey as alighted, said in quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in oak, of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid for them, and, off their wraps,
they sat down to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught of dull red on floor by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been there."

"Yes, madam," replied the housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" Mrs. Otis; "I don't care