-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one have believed first the century
that men on planet watched by intelligences
greater woman's and as own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrons went and over London, serene the
assurance of their empire over man. It is possible the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought it dismiss the idea of active upon
it impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf space astral
women, with are the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, hearts and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with yearning, and and surely
maturing their plans for grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus, I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round sun mean distance 
vermillion miles. More than that, as been proved the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, rapidly becoming too hot for
clothes be worn at all; and this, the Wenuses, was so a
prospect that the immediate of life became the discovery new
quarters notable for a gentler climate and copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, and their
hearts. Moreover, population of Wenus consisted of
Invisible Men--and Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge too harshly. Remember what havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on such the Moa the Maori, but upon
its inferior such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments it, we have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, they wings, fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden planet--it odd, the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been star of Eve--evening by
evening growing paler than a literary agent, but
failed interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which observed issuing from cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis Athens.

The storm burst us six weeks later, the time the summer
sales. As Wenus opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava set wires
of the astronomical exchange palpitating intelligence of huge
explosion of laughing gas moving towards the earth. He compared
it a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, the subsequent
events, justice the will commend itself to but the
most sober readers.

Had it not for my chance meeting Swears, eminent
astronomer objurgationist, this book have written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in of that has happened I still
remember our very distinctly. (I spell it "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible to my ear. The was warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through syphon, the little star seemed
alternately expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, that because my eye tired. I remember I
sat under patches of green and crimson swimming my
eyes. Grotesque foolish seem to the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears till one, then gave it up. He was full of
speculations about the of Wenus. Swears' was
extremely sultry.

"The anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million one."

Even Pearson's Weekly up the last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed article entitled "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, partially intelligible the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in my to ride Bantam, and too busy upon of
papers in Nature the turpitude of classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give my undivided attention to the
impending disaster. I cannot divide easily; I am an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I tell you, but very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke the called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars as fell off her
machine. She had good bulk of falls. There lights in upper
windows of the houses as the people went bed. Grotesque foolish
as this will to sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking us, singing and playing concertinas. It seemed so safe
and tranquil. But Wenuses then on their way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then first star. It was early in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by the publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I received of wisit.

I lived in those Campden Hill Gardens. It the house
opposite 