-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or both. In
order convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
present the past. In days of not so ago festival
began excite us November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, with the furtive of paper
parcels being unwrapped; house gallery.

The tension of increased to such a point there was a
positive danger of cord snapping before ought snap. On the
Eve we to bed with no hope settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the singing cold; and we were
glad to kept awake so. On supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordially pretending we had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; had a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even tooth-ache
vanished, far the spiteful word, the
venomous thought, gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, happy morn." We did salute the happy morn.

And when all the parcels definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the of the great meals. And we ate, and
we drank, and ate again; with no thought nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor morrow, of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in sheer, abandoned of
celebration. And by means motley paper headgear, fit only a
carnival, in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in is seen. And we danced and and larked, until we
could more. And we chanted a song ceremony, and separated;
ending the as we it, of good wishes. And
the next morning we were and enfeebled; did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had pain's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even today the spirit and Christmas are up, more
or in full rigour and splendour, by a of beings is
scattered earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arriving from we know
not where, dissolving before our we not how, has its way in
spite us. I mean children. By virtue the children's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and a day of the week; it is a out of the
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does remember the of a suspicion
that Christmas Day was all day rather day? In the
house my memories, it the immemorial duty of my on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, to sit down
to organ "Christians Awake" with possible stops
drawn. He to do it. Tradition, will emanated the
best bedroom, force him to it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, curl of my lips answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us is rapid. The next thing we know is
that of waits is a rather annoying at
once deprives us of sleep and takes of pockets. And then
Christmas gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmas are a tax a nuisance, present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what blessing it will be the
"festivities" (as are called) are over, can
settle commonsense again!

I do that our hearts black with on Christmas Day.

I do mean that we enjoy on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, inspiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy Christmas Day. What I to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing unreality, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean we have to brace and force
ourselves to the of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We to remind that
"it will never do" the of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude Christmas, at a
vacation, may be clearly seen contrasting it with attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. We do not to brace
and force ourselves up to enjoyment summer holiday. We
experience no in inducing feeling. There is no
fear the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do need the example of children aid us savouring the August
"festivities."

If any person breaks in with statement that I am and
the not me, and Christmas stands just where it did in
the esteem right-minded people, and that he who casts doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is not right-minded, let that person read no
more. This book is not for him. And if any person,
kindlier, condescendingly that there wrong with
Christmas my age, let that read no more. This
book is not