-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good of the to take in a movement
without precedent in of the world, the incidents
concurrent with, together those subsequent movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has object of the
writer to weave into the story his actual experiences an account of
those which are as yet an unexplored in the realm of
letters. The work submitted to the in the that it will
prove be with interest those are sympathy with
great movements and to those delight to stories of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                      THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen and one, not only placed mile-stone the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in of world.

That day placed mile-stone on the road of civilization it
saw the culmination of one of greatest ever attempted in
behalf of common education. It marked epoch the history
of the because, for first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system public
schools.

The on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one and twentieth
meridian, when the began revolving the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated of lemons
and few other articles were to equipment of the steward's
department.

The was again on way to surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, who at last
moment wandered the pier, was shouting for some to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of a blunder landed in
a on deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on between her decks the largest number of
teachers as as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any in the of the bore to a foreign land to
instruct alien people. Late in the afternoon five came up
and spouted and played around us. We fountains
of spray in the distance the sank down to pay his
wonted before the shrine night. We were alone.

By good fortune we by way of the Hawaiian Islands and at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the faint light of the coming
morn while the shone with resplendent glory the
nearer of the crater just behind the
town. High points lay around us three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds enchanting from the
spell of none us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first a gigantic precipice, reached by a hours ride from
the city horse. As one precipice, there out
before him at a dizzying depth below verdant plain, bounded in the
distance an emerald sea. The which always blows in tropical
countries gathered in between the projecting arms a
mountain and rushes over the face cliff with such that
it is said travelers to one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence things illustrating life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of of that sovereign whose grand-child the to hold the
sceptre the Kanakas. There are royal documents prove that more
than thousand men beheaded this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous of birds' feathers, made to please
the of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, elegant, robe are of reddish color. The
birds which they were were found only Hawaiian
Islands each bird only four feathers, being under each
wing. The the bird attributed the making of this
royal robe. So of were needed of hunters were
employed or more of years to number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred dollars.

At Honolulu one also that famous of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The wades far into the surf
with long board then sits astride of it upon the surface
of water. As the long come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of advancing wave, then, with the of
a rope-dancer, he weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu 