-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My in this is to present myths, the ancient, fictitious
and narratives concerning the gods, in such a as to enable
you to see the absurdity of the idea that the of the Bible
is mythical origin. Myths are narratives, having an
analogy more or less something real. From definition you
discover myth is a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it something
found in or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth a myth; the of a
counterfeit. If such the in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it in the
true God presiding over the of and the destinies of men,
as as the events of and providence? Or, can it be possible
that have counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease myths
without some near to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times have, midst deal of and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over things; the gods many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and habits.

A letter written Maximus, Numidian, to Augustin, thus: “Now,
that is a sovereign God, who beginning, who, without
having anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, man can be gross stupid to
doubt? He it is whom, different names, we the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring by
different sorts of may called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May subordinate gods preserve under whose
names, by whom all mortals adore the common Father of
gods men.” In this we have a of the mythical
system concerning ancient gods, and also relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears as representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member God they to adore entirely
the Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square are statues of Mars, one naked, armed; and
close the figure a man who, three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so to the whole town. With
regard to what you of gods being portions of only God,”

I liberty you gave to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilege; for that God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, say
that Mars, whose is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of God? That is say, dead Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, is, therefore, part
of God. Augustin adds, Not Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to inferior gods, even consecrated to the
twelve gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite follies of who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of Epicurians, in reality
acknowledged none, it is that all times the magistrates and
wise one sovereign God.” Secondary were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own to the “Master God,” and had gods representing
passions. They also had god each part His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to Him, by
worshiping the members or gods. Mars the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god this a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged the
“true God,” for distinguished between passions, and the
universe gods until they it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one of Jehovah, each member of
the great system.

Now, order establish the proposition that religion is of
mythical origin, it is to show, first, Bible was
written this of the age myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can accomplished. It will not be present in
this connection statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far oldest, as Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in times of Ogyges Inachus, whom of poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, have from the
soil, and hence one of oldest aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler the Jewish nation.” He mentioned
as a very and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, his of
Egypt, bears the testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in book
against 