-SCALLY: The Story a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough feel deeply gratified being mistaken for a lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and to hoisted
up the of the provided by a county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from Embankment Battersea.

Presently ground our way round a curve began cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate bonhomie his official
position failed to eradicate, presented and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea require, sir?" he of me.

I and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't been there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The smiled and our tickets.

"I'll you to get down," he said, and us.

For some months we had been considering of buying a dog,
and a good deal our spare time--or I should of my spare
time, for a woman's time is all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to of the animal, we to consider details as
breed, sex, age.

My wife vacillated bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, a Pekinese, they are dernier
cri. We like to dernier in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, spends good of time with us, having no
parents of own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be for my wife when I was from home. I coldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, a preference for
twelve tigers in box, and not again invited participate in the
debate.

Finally decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of age sex to be
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed communicate with a
gentleman in the North morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his specialty. In due we a reply. The
advertiser two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, Scotia's Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees inclosed, each
about as as family tree House of Hapsburg; and
the favor reply was requested, as both were being hotly
bid an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price Celtic Chief was guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We not stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent pedigrees by
return post, resumed debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't want a dog with a pedigree. We want something that
will at beggars and gentle with baby. Why not to the Home for
Lost Dogs Battersea? I believe you can dog you there for
five shillings. We run up next Wednesday see about
it--and I might well."

Hence our the tram.

Presently conductor, who kindly pointed out to us such objects
of interest the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that is many a true word in jest, we
obeyed him, and the tram went and whizzing out sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pay five shillings a dog," had
pointed out, with logic, "it is silly and pay perhaps
another five a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an expensive we might have taken a cab;
but not a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I sort vague notion it is on an in middle
of the river, called Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, something
like that. However, I no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers they don't possess--not
that that will giving it. If we start the way
we shall ourselves Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact women have constitutional aversion to
maps and time-tables. They would consult a half-witted
errand boy deaf railroad porter. "Do let us of
ourselves in the public again! I not forgotten the day
when you tried to the Crystal Palace. Besides, will blow
away. Ask that little boy there. He us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it criminal folly. A man asks a London street boy
to be to him to a Home Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" Stella.

"We asked it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answered in a most incredible fashion, for this
moment a man emerged from a our right and set the
street before us. He species of uniform; and emblazoned the
front of his hat was information he was an of the
Battersea Home for Lost