-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go Pilgrimage through Kent.


It the end of August, when a hot sun softening the asphalt
in the streets of London, and ripening in the land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted in all reverence to follow, as far as possible,
the taken by the famous of bygone days, setting from the
hostelrie where lordings lay one counsel, making
stations by the at the few places they name, and ending it,
as they did, at the shrine 'holy, martyr,' in the
Canterbury Cathedral. How better this be done than by riding over
the ground made sacred by them on our tricycle?

And it came to that one close, foggy morning, our bags
to machine wheeled out of Russell Square one was
stirring but the policeman, making last rounds and trying after
door. Down Holborn and Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist heavy on river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, where hucksters greeted us their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are there, up the second
story?' A short up the Borough High Street, from which we a
glimpse of old red roof balustraded of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner the 'Tabard' to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; how, it suddenly occurred us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This a difficulty the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked at the old of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we on with what cheer we could.

Then we went distance over the Old Kent Road, is with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, confusion cyclers, and where
in place Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it big wheel ran groove of the track, we dismount
and lift out. The sat as looked on. If he his
way, said, he would burn all things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we a few minutes
opposite a street full of old two-storied houses, with roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by distant
church steeple, its in mist, the fog was
growing as we journeyed onwards. At corner was Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while rested said
that old fountain had stood in the open space by, it pleased us to
think here been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims the made short halts, and perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern travelled same
road, had come to a stop from the young man a
donkey-cart. A little way of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were grazing, cawing overhead, and two three
bicyclers racing, and a stopped us to that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed the brick house to
our left.

After Blackheath the vanished, the sun, gladdened by sweet
air, shone on the woods, and the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to and dogs
ran out bark at us. In the meadows women leaned on their hoes
and rakes stare. From gardens, with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many behind
when, at a few minutes nine, we up on bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy little village. The only of were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were their pipes, and
as boys leaning over the wall, staring into river
below, or at the stretches of woodland and shady orchards the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, the village clock struck
nine, and at once loud bell in the factory on the other of the
little Cray to ring. One by one loungers knocked the
ashes their and the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, the of an old man in a tall white cap, came
out, and at his bidding left the sunshine the river hurried
to work. A man with a of shining onions by, followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled and timbered cottages seemed be
trying to over other to a of shining white
houses at the top. The first these was one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a shadow on the higher wall the house next
to it. On a of ground along the terrace
patches of cabbages alternated luxuriant crops of weeds. In place
there of pink hollyhock covered with vines, and in
the windows were geraniums.