-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


    "When I dabbled this art, old distemper call'd
   Melancholy exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last up the now appellation the
    Spleen, which it still retains, tho' the
     west, in a little hath written, divides the Spleen and
    Vapours, not into the Hypp, Hyppos, and the
   Hyppocons; but these divisions the Markambles,
     Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, Hockogrokles."

    Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
   Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century term for a
wide range nervous diseases--were when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical well as lay authors been writing literature
of types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English the names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora materia the
subject makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature clear of thoughts
that had put the subject, as well as of the
causes, symptoms, cures of this commonplace malady.

No of seventeenth- eighteenth-century English literature
needs to reminded of the interest of writers of the in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent both poetry of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicted heroes weeping heroines populate
the England's literature. There is scarcely decade in the
period 1600-1800 contribute to the literature of
melancholy; considerable in are works that could placed
under this that makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" "L'Allegro," Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and "sensible" and
"sensitive" as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in of Jane
Austen. So great in is this literature the eighteenth
century, C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called Age of Melancholy." The vastness of literature is
sufficient justify reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook the subject a prolific all known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized hypochondria: signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) gristle (chondria) the disease was discussed
principally in terms. The that hypochondriasis was
a condition the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time innovation was Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition showing that and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause both was a disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had theory that the internal immediate
cause was a of spirits arising a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, bodily disorders. By the
onset malady to phenomena and not to of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be in the next century in
England, Holland, France. Sydenham's influence on physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the of the origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, historical
cause and effect--the became fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of recall Scrub's denial The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of possibility that Archer the Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire like William Somervile's The
Hyp: Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie written that he often
"heard old fashioned and provincial 
even  lifetime say, 'Oh, you give hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me in the neck'"; I have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may a corruption
of "hyp." As in the early eighteenth century, the "hyp" was
perhaps far from what century has learned to call Angst. It
was also as a for "lunacy," as anonymous of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley his Countrymen, they are mad, or
Hypochondriac, which but a name Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, Dutch physician author of The Fable the Bees,
seems to have that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number diseases a specific