-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a that Bible description of the spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I been
very in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have reasonable it, have ventured
to publish it. It in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, first of man, how corrupted themselves, and
how God them with a flood, simply stated the principal facts,
and a description of the it not on that continent,
he not point out the country in Noah then
resided, all new him, and his family, no knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, it that continent; thus, the
location, admitted to be somewhere earth, has been a
profound mystery the present time, and consequently the cause
of no little speculation. But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on American Continent; the of time been plainly
pointing to what is known the “North West,” place. But this
last fact I was ignorant I made the of garden, and
commenced developing about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, thorough knowledge the Bible, and standing the
hanging and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting rivers, I became sensibly by a
suggestion, This garden Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, me then, was too large. Of course I never
given it thought, nor it up my mind what should, or
might be dimentions. However strong were impressions,
that I, as matter pleasantry, used, occasionally say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others becoming with idea of its being
not possible, highly probable. Where would scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which man, as he now is, an
inhabitant all the earth?  Not far north, not too far south. Our
garden is place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if obtained, are corrupting in tendencies, and
should be sought, toiled for, to properly enjoyed; and be
placed at distance, just where God it, at of
the stream. Our garden is still the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should a place susceptible of, and to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, worship of great
Builder of the universe, Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than garden, and its
surroundings? If is, we would like to see it.

I have related the as they have been presented to me, or I have
discovered them, the will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will and satisfactory
investigation.
                                               THE AUTHOR.

Out Eden to water garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, greatness and importance, which,
answers our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden a certain
country; that the Euphrates crosses country, that “eastward”,
or the eastward, bank of, certain on that river, is
located the garden Eden; and three lesser rivers run and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus rivers run into
and it, but one, the fourth, out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden the Lord;” streams crossing the plain, and running the
river of Jordon, just as three rivers our plain, our
Euphrates. The given to rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of well known the antideluvians.

We need not undertake to prove, show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together rivers in the region
where was first to be, and which explorers and
researchers to to Africa, and other countries, search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we found it he others, can and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities La Crosse, Wisconsin, Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with tributaries, of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the border, 2,000 miles westward the Rocky
mountains border, and from the Gulf Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 north, the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region earth, and is being and