-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst peasant the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, by a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, a painter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth seventeenth centuries we find painters who,
whilst living the themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their down to
posterity. It only quite that one of the greatest all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has to his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he looked upon as painter,
whose subjects were generally rather nature; who,
moreover, himself with depicting droller of the
village life his period, and consequently was not be taken
seriously. Of years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and have revealed as one of the in his
own sphere of any time. The series of in Vienna,
and the solitary examples about great of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a as well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now to us, possess a
fidelity vigour of handling such as of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian Ostade brilliant
exponents. In more recent prototype--Millet--the profound
and of everyday simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with fervour his temperament.

Their temperament bears the to his as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more temper had come over
all of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was the less strenuous or
unending. The and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was feature of
Dutch the period. But every whit as from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During two which elapsed these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, down even to lowest classes, tended to
the sobering habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through equitable distribution of
the land which Revolution had bestowed upon him, was man
than his Dutch prototype preceded him by couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life found around him, same
incisive truth and absorbing to be found the
Dutchmen whom I compared him, and Millet can be
considered as a descendant the mighty Brueghel.

The of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by extreme own
disposition; and, secondly, by his some the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness perception can be
gauged by enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at time
when the merits of that master not understood to-day.

Many his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, one could cite many compositions which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run parallel lines.

Upon regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, wonders
from whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to in works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between early and those of his years is
stupendous, but lines pursued are
essentially to the of the he led and the high
ideal he kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in position to grasp sorrows and of the
simple folk by whom he surrounded. He work,
although were of it, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles their most and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that had the courage to live life as he did.

It has the to decry certain phases of art. A
charge of is urged against of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," which many hard things have lately been
said, a case point. It be remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great cities such as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed from centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, has
heard nothing of the and of
every society are familiar. His on religion are
exactly which to him his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting truths he was first taught. Such
simple have departed from even the peasantry in most of
France. Only Brittany and in La Vendée could to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us the "Angelus."

The figures in are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French life. The of the has arrived, and
after many of unremitting toil, the of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims finish another day. The still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a and glorious sunset, lends intensity
of poetical feeling which blends with the placid nature
of the theme. All around us we of man's perpetual
struggle nature, the