-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The good Queen Anne came to over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being King France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a the feet of the much-bewigged dandified folk stepped
it down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, strutting promenades of the more
fashionable places of city, stood in the vestry the
parish of Saint Jean-en-Grève a group the small
burgess folk, gathered a little infant, whilst to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as the badly forth in black
and ever, henceforth to be good or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th September, four days
past, tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter yonder consequential fellow,
the law from the Police Court; handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in turn godmother.

The sand being flung upon the ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of in the stilted of
good-fellowship day between priest party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, more than a little gossip the
Court and some of heads, under-lips forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, is godfather
Prévost king's majesty, therefore the whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog affairs.

Well might be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disaster. But was still France upon the high seas.

Then folk, bored high politics, would back the
talk to infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he a Saturday child, therefore to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's home in the Rue de
Verrerie a of wine compliments banter, and
more vague surmises as lay the knees of for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of Grand Monarque setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the of long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French Spanish fleets Vigo Bay, and
carrying some of eight from the as
treasure. The child's first saw English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken of Ramilies; of
Oudenarde; of Lille--to six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But was Paris a-bellringing in his at seven; there was
born the king's grandson a sickly child that was him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher day from his
modest home stand at child's side than thinks.

The Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and up to manhood a France lay the
regency of this dissolute, Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have been obscure, honest
fellow, the trade of art, and too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortune," runs recorded
verdict his day. But he the virtue of his
mediocrity, and the to save his from the of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself the boy schooling
with pencil and brush, and the up in atmosphere art
and in the company of artists, he him to
the Lemoyne, a really great painter rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen for promising seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that Correggio and Veronese, rid
himself of hard tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he to acquire, from Lemoyne at French way of
stating what he desired to state, a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style then the schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from equally years that it have
taken him to the Italian style from artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, so his master that
it dangerous to attribute a picture of time to master or
the pupil without careful evidence.

Yet youth vowed he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant in his pupils. But be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death from his fingers, and that
he had a and mind and hand, from the hesitances of a
student, daring in