-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is to dispute fact those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, meeting, and resolved that earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the of
the saints; and thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, taking
possession of themselves—had of English of
appropriation which has England the of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has the British
flag quarter of globe, has been the
communities ruled over, or to the nation itself. In some
cases undoubtedly unjustly; some the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in hands; in some
cases have rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia New Zealand the
better for our rule.  An Englishman well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent by millions, but
then we are rich, and expenditure not unproductive one.

We have lives, but the who have fallen have been
embalmed nation’s memory, and the of their heroism will
mould the and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers days gone
by; and yet a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances the case, and to result in a effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa concerned,
this is emphatically the case.  Originally Cape Settlement a
fort for the the coast.  The country is to drought, and seems
chiefly by diggers, farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour dear, and all carriage to coast is expensive.  The English
never in the colonies, but return to England as they have
made a fortune. Living is quite dear in England, in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, chief all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the there are fine
views to be seen, in quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, rivers, summer, torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are nuisance to decent people. “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to emigrant the chances which he would in Australia New
Zealand.  South Africa not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient to make agriculture a brilliant Success. Nevertheless,
land is so abundant colonist sure, at least, to
make living, provided he not drink, has a good of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations require capital. As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them grow them. A cabbage appears
to be a luxury, price of butter is prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, the paradise of
hunters, the of colonists.” The remark is exactly
true, but all may be accepted as the truth. If
this so, it, then, it be asked, we English so
anxious to get of country?  The is, We hold the
Cape Good Hope to be desirable as a and harbour of refuge
on our to India; but opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the for which it from the Dutch 1806 not
exist now.  Whether the has ever a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, found there a people
whom we annexed their will, and of whom we made bitter
enemies. These the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to the after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid the native difficulty was a very one.  They either made
the native a slave, they drove away. Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their towards us, whom they
might be supposed to with exceeding jealousy, not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under the
circumstances, have expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, to of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony been borne to
them later travellers.  They lived as farmers, life agreed
with them.  The are finely made, out of them might
be raised. In 1815 made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s Cradock,
and complained oppressive a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared he considered this between himself and his
Hottentot be a presumptuous innovation his