-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT impossible to over-estimate deep importance of great
subject, for on our conclusions must our confidence
in the great mysteries the Gospel.  There a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue intellect. It has done vast already, and
is doing great things now. But there a limit no
power pass; a which has no means of investigation; an
unseen lies quite outside range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for are all rapidly
hastening thither, He who is our Father, our Creator, Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, science
can inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or life; is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He has imparted all needful knowledge
respecting it, is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we live and die convinced of soul’s immortality,
but still utter of the plan which God arranged for its
safety. Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired of Scripture.

It is the communication from God man respecting the things the
unseen world.  It that beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the nature of God, and the plan of
salvation He prepared in mercy for fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fail us, whole hope fails it, and if we
cannot rely sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information as all those great truths most concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to place; our present joy, as well as future
hopes, melt away into ignorance all that lies
beyond range of science, and hopelessness to all this
present world.

It not my present to attempt to the of
Scripture.  It a great and noble subject, and which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But not the this paper.  My
object is to examine extent nature of inspiration, and that I
must exclusively myself.  I take it granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, security it gives for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, all statements the word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is idea of Scripture which we
gather from knowledge it,’  and attempt has made to
show how by definition all are overcome. I freely
grant that such a does present a very easy and method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, we on reducing the authority of
Scripture to own ideas respecting it, it not likely that there
will be much left embarrass us.  There is however difficulty, and
that most important one, which it cannot solve.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better than vague of own
creation.

St. Peter differs very author that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and asserts that ‘Holy of God
spake they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the of inspiration, and that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice heaven, but holy men spake were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, it be necessary
to (1) element, (2) human element, and (3) the
combination two; after which we may of the
difficulties which lie against doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely say that divine element is the of
modern controversy.  But I hope we meet points especially
agitated, by four questions.

  I. Does extend the whole book?

 II.  Is it equal?

  III. Is it verbal?

 IV.  Does it the infallible?

I. Does it extend book?

Our inquiry, then, must relate to the area by it; or, in
other words, the question, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus by the Holy Ghost? or merely of
them, and certain books only?

Now, the language St. Paul 2 Tim. iii. 16, our guide, we
have a clear and answer; for it is written, ‘All Scripture
is given by of God.’  It stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either the singular plural no less than
fifty times, and in single instance is employed solely with
reference to collection of writings which were as the
oracles God.  Everything therefore included that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only question is, How much was included?

Now,