-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy to make a assertion, such
assertions produce greater on many minds than most careful
and best-established proof. Thus it is at all an thing to
hear it asserted the utmost confidence that what is ‘The
Doctrine the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is a considerable of in the
assertion, and place reliance who make it, as if they, and they
only, the expositors of Church’s doctrine.  In cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures not investigated
because is supposed to have by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because doctrine is regarded
as reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred of faithful service the Church of England is on
such a sifting time she has yet experienced, it is only fair to
her her own language should heard, and her teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the of Scripture, but the Church of England;
and my desire is by the careful and candid of
her own whether there is, or is not, authority for the
assertion she teaches is commonly ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’ In doing this, our first to what
is point at issue, and this is so easy a task as may
appear, amongst those doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on to we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am safe in arranging the principal points at
issue the three of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these I propose to in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, to our
first and chief attention must directed.  Now, there can be doubt
on the of Word God their true and only
guide that it is sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the precious body and of blessed Saviour. I am
not now discussing in what way we on Him, or His words in
the of St. John refer, do not refer, to Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that not
the present question.  My present is with the that, however
we His words, we taught Lord Himself such a
feeding is to life: ‘Except eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) body
and blood of Christ connected the Lord’s Supper.  I am now
making any assertion to way which it is connected, for that is
the point to be determined. All I say is that there
clearly is connexion, the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread one body; for we are one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body blood our Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament the Lord’s Supper is some or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as the the connexion, is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that the act of consecration the
bread wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and both the bread become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, divinity. The the doctrine
of the Real Presence the Church of England differ, as as I can
understand them, from Rome one respect, and only; namely, that
they maintain bread and wine cease to have the accidents
of and wine, so that they may still be spoken as bread and wine,
although have body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight is of no importance in the
discussion, and have introduced only to the
conclusion those texts which speak the bread as bread, and
the wine wine, consecration. The practical conclusion the
same, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and the
wine. This is what is by the expression, ‘The objective
presence.’  It that He is present in the a real
independent object, without reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object the hand of man who
holds it, without any reference to state mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is by us the great
principles of the Reformation, no change in the
bread and wine, they solemnly set apart for sacramental by
means of consecration, but