-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they a pretence of a figure.  Celebrations and
suppressions were equally painful him, and but one of former found
a place in life.  He kept year in his own the date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would the perhaps to say
that occasion _him_: kept him at least effectually from
doing anything else. It took him again and again with a hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would have to his
marriage-morn.  Marriage had had of old too to to the
matter: the girl who was to have been his bride there had been no
bridal embrace. She of a malignant wedding-day
had been fixed, and he before fairly tasting it an affection
that promised to to brim.

Of that benediction, however, have false to say this life
could really emptied: was still ruled a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a of numerous
passions, and even all these years no sense had stronger with
him than sense of being bereft. He had needed no and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He in world—he
had done all one: he never, forgotten. He tried
to his existence else might up room in it, had
failed it more than a house of which mistress was eternally
absent.  She absent of all on the December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He no arranged it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drove forth without mercy, and
the goal of pilgrimage was far.  She been buried in a London
suburb, then of Nature’s breast, but which had seen lose one
after every feature of freshness.  It in during the
moments he stood there that his eyes place least. They looked
at another image, they to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was past? Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s that if there weren’t other dates than this there other
memories; and by the time George Stransom fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied. There in his life than the
ghost Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had losses most men,
but he had counted his losses more; hadn’t seen death more closely,
but had in a it more deeply. He had formed little little
the of Dead: had come early in life that
there was something one had to do for them.  They in their
simplified intensified essence, conscious absence expressive
patience, as if they had only been stricken dumb.
When all sense of failed, all sound of ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earth: asked so little that
they got, poor things, even less, and again, died every day, the
hard usage of life.  They no organised service, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, safety. Even ungenerous provided for the
living, but even those who called most generous did nothing for the
others. So on George Stransom’s part had grown up the a
resolve he least would do something, it, that is, for his
own—would perform the great without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, every man had, to charity, the ample resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the at any rate went by he found himself communion with
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts Others. He spared the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quite it had risen he could have told you,
but what to pass was an altar, as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted with candles and dedicated to
these rites, reared in spiritual spaces.  He had
wondered of old, in embarrassment, whether he had religion; being
very sure, not a little content, he hadn’t at events the
religion some the he had known wanted him have.  Gradually
this question straightened out for him: became clear to that
the religion instilled by his consciousness had been simply the
religion of Dead. It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It his love of great
offices, of solemn and splendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked no ceremonial more than those to which his worship
was attached. He had imagination these things they
were accessible to any one who should feel need of them. The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could them with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers. The
cost, in the phrase, of keeping them fell wholly the
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


He had year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walking home at close of
a day was arrested the London street by particular effect
of shop-front lighted dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before persons were gathered.  It was window a
jeweller whose diamonds sapphires to laugh,