-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed write introduction Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s itself. Now
I have the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped like a breeze through American graphic for several
decades--and I feel that should be more the opening
of to perennial springtime freshness.

But still there something that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the of work his time.

It should about, because it hard to today, in
our of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to sun air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century bursting its seams:
Morris failing to but startling with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and their
avant garde galaxy startling their in a way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern in the Paris only
a handful knew about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, goings-on were known a connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It Bradley in Nineties who made the American
public stir in its and an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He American colonial typography, and free,
and from springboard he off a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant design. In it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He native, corn-fed American another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic was produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind he started Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There lusty, ambition slight
body, and it to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of scores. The turbulent current American and
industrial appealed him more than any exquisite backwater.

So work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not publications, the movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; smashed more and more
liberties--successfully--than has done before or since.

Now his lasted as as his active career.

His work been our completely that of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of him--the and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always giant’s spirit
in powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My is enough that I can for all these
latecomers, “Thank you for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who is probably plenty of himself.

Lynn a shoe town. This is 1875. Most the work is done by hand.

The employees all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppers of high, lace
shoes. You a express wagon. You finished work to
the and return with a of unfinished. For you
are paid five cents. With your savings a printing press. It is
the kind you on a and slap with palm your hand. In
business offices it is used stamp lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
box of pi. When you succeed in finding a few of the same font
you file them to fit type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath the Civil War. You have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away you to attend
the school your class gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A takes you to his school. But most
of the remain home with your father. He he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and you
grow up will to an artist there will money for
your education. He much fine advice never forget.

Then he sends you to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the pot. They give you the
little the selling. You crack them a rock, have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally a Saturday night, go
to the baker’s get pot of baked buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, is cold cod-fish cake to be in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone world and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It be made to last until Boston and
are the Park Street of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is