-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE Vindication written during week in the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the it has
been hitherto delayed, partly pursue the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and from a determination not to
publish till a fair had been to to
the New Infant School Society.  In replying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write any other than I was answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope such an is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne chosen to my
“Letter” on Infant Schools the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for the body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat with some degree forbearance, and in
many instances only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The questions at between Churchmen Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be utter failure; and I hope who have it,
or read this, will retire from them both, and devoutly
to New Testament, as standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to “Letter,” appeared to me facts, relative to
the Infant School Society, sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined a explanatory in
writing, rather than to make any reply through medium of press.

Having induced to alter my determination, I respectfully to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by newspapers, that it been
determined on, at a meeting held in Guildhall, which but
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system Infant Education be beneficially extended this city;
and, with a view of bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.” The meeting which that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and authorize examination
of the schools—and, whatever private might be with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the public knew was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not own
speculation,” but as the agent, employed by meeting, to its
resolution effect.  I think, therefore, that what I stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” fully borne out by all the
facts the case.

I said nothing “Letter” to that the of Dissenters
would be excluded from schools.  My explanation of the
“Advertisement” occasioned “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that members of no Christian church shall allowed
to participate with you in formation of society, or in its
committee, its operations.” If, however, I had expressed fear
that the church catechism might introduced, or arrangement
might be made would prevent Dissenters from their children
to the schools, at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All have
united in declaring that the schools will be classes, and
that be no nor formulas which Dissenters can
object. At public meeting, in newspapers, the Dean
expressly stated, that no to exclude the children any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed any points any person might not learn; as they would
be to adore God, to know merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to in peace and with one
another. Their rules, said he, be to persons all
denominations, who would have opportunity sending their children,
if they accorded those rules.” Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would be open to children of of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In accordance decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help to a mistake
into which my reverend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regard exclusion of the children dissent. He may
rest assured, that is decided respect the discipline of
the schools, which can held to be an impediment any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials entering the school—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any of such a spirit.  Should appear,
I prepared contend it to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound quit the society.” The
speeches at the public meeting are, however, a that
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” I “rest assured,” that, so
far as the are concerned, they as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to the of Churchmen and
Dissenters admitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advertisement” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, the children Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from of society, and operations.

The public meeting, at the speeches were delivered, was
distinguished by expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, in small degree
gratified in learning, from the public papers, that several