-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls most you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, Betsey’s very
dearest doll, played most of the time her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school who too to play dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too to keep them
packed their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t herself the mother, for were all
grown up, older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and as nearly could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any the dolls were sick, Betsey once
took part old Dr. Betson, and talked with them about
tonics pills.

She for each of dolls, too, and you listened in the
next room, would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey such a skilful little carpenter seamstress,
that you find only five pieces furniture in the pictures that
she did make all alone herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And was good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I think that of her best lessons in
patience and Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did company, and three
voices,—first a deep, bass voice, and a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then pleasant low bark. Mother open the door
very and in.

There lay Betsey on great fur rug, her head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, Morris chair, divided two
rooms. Mother it must a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And could mistake
the dining-room in front, its large pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at end, her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter salad, Dumpling Delight barked gruffly in a
while, many smells in the air.

“Will you a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” Dinah.

(“Mercy,” Mother, door, “what dinner!”)
“I’ll tell what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we invite Prudence and husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This is a tight
fit for three, with extra ones!”

“I I afford larger house,” said Mr. Delight in worried
tone.

“My husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit straight
on and take Mrs. Delight the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t a I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the together tiptoed to telephone. She
smiled to herself as she called up carpenter-shop.

“I want to make my daughter Betsey doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and big between rooms. And can you
get done Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I get done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On morning of her birthday, Betsey to breakfast,
expecting to see a of dainty white parcels plate.

“Your birthday present is up the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be large and wonderful. Once it had her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, once her darling black
pony. So Betsey breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there stood in
the center of the room,—the house, painted snow-white inside
and green outside,—with four and and tiny
window-sashes, and the threshold!

Betsey rushed over to little cottage, put her in the
little dining-room and looked double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to how it would to live here,” thought.

And then fell a white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll thank you before I begin play,” Betsey, tossing
back her down-stairs at great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” Betsey, whirling around in middle the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, excuse
Betsey doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over little brass bed smoothly
as (with 