-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER us that Dickens, his novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in world no outline, or, if they have an outline, it a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in natural changes of life, and under strain of restless
and activity, old buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly in Scott, speaking of
himself, the manner of nab venture.” He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated manner
of Wilkie Collins, or of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, _roman policier_, careful study
of character. Except _Great Expectations_, none of later tales
rivals merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will served;” no sedulous
care could compensate for of “the sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more drawn towards the
secret that curiosity, the game of hide and seek with the
reader who to the of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, by the strain his American readings;
of that labour achieved under of ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore a series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures kind, after _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.” But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the “a curious and idea,” August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.” We think that mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, not in the vein of humour. “The
Billickin,” on the hand, the lodging-house keeper, is very
gracious fooling:” unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are in surprises.  Mr. Grewgious be
caricatured much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, not contrast
with Jo _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of character.  As far as allowed to Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on is admirable: is
very and original.  The all that melodrama can desire,
but do miss, I think, the of a small cathedral
town. Here there is a lack of and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the from the life.

On whole, Dickens himself was perhaps interested in plot,
his secret, his surprises, game of hide and with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his that he had not sufficiently his
tracks in latest numbers. Yet, he died June, 1870, leaving
three completed still unpublished, he secret as a puzzle
to the curious. Many efforts have been to his purpose,
especially his intentions as the hero. Was Edwin Drood killed, did
he escape?

By coincidence, in September, 1869, Dickens was working over late
Lord Lytton’s for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance John
Ackland,” of to whether Ackland
was alive dead.  But he was defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most attempts a about Edwin, a study based on
deep Dickens, is “Watched the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print. In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent. Of Mr. Proctor’s I offer necessary corrections, and
I I have unravelled skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle. As and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, become clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings the influence of opium.  He saw in vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest things supernatural that, but for strong
restraining power his sense, he might have into the
follies of spiritualism.” His interest such matters peeps
out in this novel—there are two of the supernormal—and he may
have to the limited extent which requires. If I am
right, Dickens further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this preface, I proceed the analysis Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read proof made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible none of theories.

                                                 ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR