-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within thirty seen
more romances generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I retired, and at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a aspect, so reviewed, had when they were
in progress.  I from the Play now, and can the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, from the
glare, bewilderment, and the Theatre.

Let one Romances of the real world.

There is truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges human
creature his her own the individual character
written it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, it must (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are given to
it,—that numbers of people accept stock expressions of
the face as the whole characteristics, neither seek nor know
the refinements are truest,—that You, for instance, give great
deal of time and attention to reading music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, please, do qualify yourself read the
face the or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching to
you,—I assume to be five hundred times than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to enough about it, and you are not be in.

I confess, my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have taken in by acquaintances, I have been in (of
course) by friends; far oftener friends any other class of
persons. How I to be so deceived? Had I quite misread their faces?

No. Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded face and
manner alone, was true.  My mistake in suffering them to
come nearer to and themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which own our general outer office
in the City was plate-glass. I could see through it passed
in the outer office, hearing a word.  I had put in place of
a wall had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who to us on
business, their faces alone, by anything
they said. Enough to that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and Life Assurance Office is all times exposed to be
practised upon by most crafty and cruel race.

It was through glass partition that I first saw gentleman whose
story I am to tell.

He had come in my observing it, had umbrella
on the counter, was bending over to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was so, dark, well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) if he had said, in so many words: ‘You me, if you
please, my friend, as I show myself.  Come here, follow
the gravel path, off grass, I trespassing.’

I conceived a very great to man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked of our printed forms, clerk was them
to him explaining them.  An obliged agreeable smile on his
face, and his met those of clerk with sprightly look. (I have
known a quantity nonsense talked about bad men looking you in
the face. Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty stare
honesty out of countenance, any in week, if is to
be got by it.)

I saw, the corner of his eyelash, that he of my looking
at him. Immediately he turned the parting in his toward the glass
partition, as if he said with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a moments he had put on his hat and up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the card in hand. ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is for
orders.’

I should mention he wore dainty cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here? Did say?’

‘Yes, he he was here by a of yours.  He noticed
you, but as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance would not trouble you.’

‘Did know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ I.  ‘I want nothing present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a of mine, a
merchant, a man taste, buys pictures books, the man
I 