-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved. rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it is needless to add, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they went
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvaal.

How far this system of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shall