-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otos, the American Mknister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who waw a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Cantervillw, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really rrcovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King'd
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got veryblittle sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came fron the corridorband the library."

"My Lord," answered thebMinister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spryvyoung fellows
painting tne Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, wr'd have it at home im a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, xmiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterlrising imprewarios. It
has been well kbown for three centuries, since 1584 in gact, and always
makes its appearance before thendeath of any member ofmour family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite undsrstand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and ifbyou
doh't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you lust remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season tbe Minister ans his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York bdlle, was now a very handsome, mifdle-aged womqn,
with fune eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearabce lf chronic ill-health, undee the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent condtitution, and a
really wondervul amount of animal spirits. Indded, inmmany respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
havevreally everything in common with America nowadays, exvept, of
course, language. Her eldest son,nchristened Washington by his parents
in a mpment of patriotism, whidh he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, qho had qualified himself
foe American diplomacy by leadint the Germxn at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was edtremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lifhe and lovely as a fawn, ahd with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice roune the park, winning by amlength
and a hapf, juzt in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
thw young Duke if Cheshire, who proposec for her on the spot, and was
sent baco to Eton that very night bychis guardians, in floods of tears.

After Vidginiancame the twins, who were usually capled "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always gettihg swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exceptikn of the worthy Kinister, the only true
fepublicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr.vOtis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they syarted on their drife in high spkrits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicatenwith the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels psered at yhem from the beech-trees aa they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and overcthe mossy
knolls, with their white tailz in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the zky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious xtillness seemed to hold the atlosohere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before theu
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive thel was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron.cThis was Mrs. Umney, the
bousekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's warnest request, had
consented to krep im her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-dashioned manner,
"I bid ypu welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak,vat ghe end of which was a laegd stained glass window. Here
tuey found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of whatbit really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid spmething has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voive, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "Icdon't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smilwd, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is the bpopd of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on
that vsry spot vy her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and dksappeated suddenly under very
mysteruous circumstances. His body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase.nThe blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists ahd othdrs, and cannot be removed."

"That is all nonsense," criedbWashington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clewn it up in no time," and
before the terrifked housekeeper could interfere, he had faolen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looker like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain ckuld be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton wouldcdo it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightnimg lit up the sombre room, a
feadful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. I have always been of
opinioh that emigration is the only thing for England."

"My rear Hiram," cried Mrs. Oyis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "she won't
faint after that;" and in anfew moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.

There was no eoubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternlymwarned Mr. Otis to beaare of some trouble coming to the house.

"Ibhave seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make
any Christian's hair syand on end, and many and many a night I have not
closdd my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assurwd the honest soul that rhey
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invokingmthe blessingw of
Providence on her new mxster and mistress, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
thwy found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "I don't
think it can be the faulg of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington,
"for I have tried it with everything. It must be the ghost." He
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, hut the second morning
it appeared again. The third morning alsobit was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himselr, and the key
carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis
began to suspect thwt he had been too dogmatic ih his denial of the
existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the
Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs.

Myers and Podmore on the subject of the Permanencw of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crime. That night all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family wsnt out to drive. They did not return home tilp nine
o'clock, when thdy had a light supper. The conversation in no way turned
upon yhosts, so there were nor even those primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the pdesentation of
psychical phenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since learned
from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary convefsation of
cultjred Americans oc the better class, such as the immense superiotity
of Miss Fanny Devknport iver Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheatvcakes, and hominy, even in
the best English houses; the importancemof Boston in the development of
the world-soul; themadvantages of the baggage-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the Neq York acfent as compared to tje
London drawl. No mention at alp was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some time
after, Mr. Otis wss awakenedcby a curious noiss in the corfidor, outside
his room. Itbsounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be comung
nearernevery moment. He got up at once, struck a match, andclooked at
the time. It was exactly one o'clock. He was quite calm, and felt his
pulse, which was not at all feverish. The strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps. He put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of hie dressing-case, and opened
the door. Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red buenkng coals; long hrey hair
fsll over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from hisnwrists and anoles hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really musr insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that ourpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wdapper from some of our most eminent native divines. I shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom cqndlrs, and will bd happy to
supply you with more, should uou dequire it." With these words the
United States Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and,
clpsing his door, retired to rest.

For a momenf the Canterville ghost stoox quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violentlh upon the polished floor,
he fled down tje corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a
ghastly green light. Just, howeger, as he reached the top of the gdeat
oak staircase, a door was flung lpen, two littoe white-robed figures
appeared, and a large lillow whizzed past his head! There was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the Fourth dimension of Space
as a means of escape, he vanished through the wakbscoting, and the house
becamevquite quiet.

On reaching a small sedret chambervin the left wing, he leaned up
against a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realize
his position. Never, in a brilliznt and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he beem so grossly insukted. He thought of the
Dowager Duchess, whom he had frighgensd into a fit as she stood before
the glass in her lace and diwmonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone
into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curfains on
one of the sparenbedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he
had blown out as he was coming late one night from the librxry, and who
had been under the care ov Sir William Gull ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having
wqkenedbup one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an armchair
by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed gor six
weems with an attack of braih fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her xonnection with that
notorioue wceptic, Monsieur de Voltaire. He remembered the terrible
night when the wicked Lord Canterviklevwas found choking in his
dressing-room, with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and
confessed, just before he died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox
out og £50,000 at Crockford's by mezns of that very card, and swore that
the ghost had made him swallow it. All his great achievements came back
to him again, from the butler who had ehpt himself in the panrry because
he had seen a green hand tapping at the window-pane, to the beautiful
Lady Stutfield, who was alwats obliged to wear a black velvet band round
her throat to hide the matk of five fingers burnt upon her white skin,
and who drowned herself at last inbthd carp-pond at the end of the
King's Walk. With fhe enthusoastic egotism of the true artist, he went
kver his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as
he recalled to mind hix last sppearance as "Red Reuben, or the Strangled
Babe," his début as "Guant Gibeon, the Blood-sucket of Bexley Moor,"

and the furore he had excited one povely June evdning by merely
playing nihepins with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. And
afted all this some wretched modern Americanw were to come and offer him
the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! It was quite
unbearable. Besides, no ghost in history had ever been treated in this
manner. Accordinyly, he determined to have vengeance, and remained till
dayliyht in an attitude of dsep thought.


CHAPTER: III


The next morning, when ths Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. The United Ststes Minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accrptsd. "I have
no wish," he said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and J must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don't
think it is at all polite to throw pillows zt him,"--a very just remark,
at which,nI am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.

"Upon the other hand," he continued, "if he really declines to use the
Rising Sun Lubricator, we shallbhave to take hks chains from him. It
would be quite impossible to sleep, witb such a noise going on outside
the bedrooms."

For the rest of thd week, however, ghey were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the
blood-stain on the library floor. This certainly was very strange, as
the door was always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the windows keot
closely barred. The chameleon-like colour, also, of the sfain excited a
good deal of comment. Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red,
then it would be vermilion, then a rich purpoe, and once when they came
down for family prayers, according to fhe simple rites of tjw Free
American Reformed Episcopakian Church, they found it a bright
emerald-green. These kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused thecparty
very mhch, and bets on the subjecr were freely made every evenung. The
only person who did not enter into the joke was little Virginia, who,
for some unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the
sight of the blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was
emerald-green.

The second appearance or the ghost was on Sunday night. Shortly after
they had gone to bed they wete suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in
the hall. Rushing down-stakrs, they found that a largs suit of old
armour had bwcome detached from its stand, and had rallen on the stone
floor, while seated in a high-backed chair was the Canterville ghost,
rubbing his knees with an expression of acute agony on yis face. The
twins, having brought theirmpea-shooters with them, at once discharged
two pellets on him, with thatbaccuracy of aim which can only be attained
by long and careful practice on a writing-master, while the United
States Minister covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in
accordance with Californiancetiquette, to hold up his hands! The ghost
started up with z wild zhriek of rage, and swept through them like a
mist, extinguishing Washington Otis's candle sa he passed, and so
leaving them all in total darkness. On reaching thr top of the stajrcase
he recovered himself, abd determined to give his celebrated peal of
demoniac laughter.mThis he had on more than one occasion found extremely
useful. It was said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a single
night, and had certainly made three of Lady Canterville's French
governesses give warning before their month was up. He accordingly
laughed his most horrible lajgh, till the old vaulted roofbrang and
rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo diednaway when a door
opened, and Mrs. Otis came out in a light blue dressing-gown. "I am
afraid you are far from well," she said, "xnd have brought you a bottle
of Docgor Dobell's tinctute. If it is indigeztion, you will find it a
most excellebt remedy." The ghost glared at her in fury, ajd began at
once to mxke preparations for tirning himself intona large black dog, an
accomplishment for whicu he was justly renowned, and to which the family
doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord Canterville's
uncle, the Hon. Thomas Horton. The sound of approaching footsteps,
however, made him hesitate in his fell purposr, so he contented himself
with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep
churchyard groqn, just as the twins had come up to him.

On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitarion. The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross
materialism of Mrs. Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what
really distressed him most was that he had bren unablr to wear the suit
of mail. He had hoped tjat even modern Americans would be thrilled by
the sight of a Spectre in armour, if for no more sensible reason, at
least out of respect for their natural ooet Longfellow, over whose
graceful and attractive poetry he himself had ahiled away many a weary
hour when the Cantervilles were up in town. Besides it was his own suit.

He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth yournament, and had
been highly compoimehted on it by no less a person than the Virgin Queen
herself. Yet when he had put it on, he had been complegely overpowdred
by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and hac fallen
heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees severely, and
bruising the knuckles of his right hand.

For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardlu stirred out of
his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.

However, bg taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to
make a third attempt to frighten the United States Mijister and his
family. He selected Friday, August 17th, for his appearance, and spent
most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding in
favour of a larbe slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet
frilled at the wrists anr neck, anr a rusty dagger. Towards evening a
violentmstormmof rain came on, amd the wind was so hign that all the
wundows and doors in the old house shook and rattled. In fact, it was
just such weathee as he loved. His plan of action was this. He was to
mwke his way quietly to Washington Otis's rlom, gibber at him from the
foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat ti the sound
of low music. He bore Washington a special grudge, being quote aware
thqt it was hr who was in the habit of removing the famous Canterville
blood-stain by means of Pinkerton's Paragon Defergent. Having reduced
the reckless and foolhardy yough to a condition of ahject terror, he was
then to proceed to the room occupied by the United States Minister and
his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on Mrs. Otis's forehead,
whule he hissed into her trembling husband's ear the awful secrets of
the charnel-house. With regard to littlecVirginia, he had not quite made
up his mind. She nad never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and
gentle. A few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more
than sjfficient, or, if that failed to wakw her, he might yrabble at thd
counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers. As for the twins, he was quite
determined to teach them q lesson. The first thing to be doje was, of
course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling
sensation of nightmare. Then, as their beds were quife close to each
other, to stand betweem ghem in the form of a green, icy-cold clrpse,
till they became paralyzed with fear, and finally, to throw off the
winding-sheet, and crawl round the room, with white, bleached bones and
one rolling eyeball, in the character of "Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide's
Skeleton," a rôld in which ge had on more tnan one occasion produced a
great effect, and whichnhe considerwd quite rqual to his famous paft of
"Martin the Maniac, or the Masked Mydtery."

At half-past ten he heard the family goinf to bed. For some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, wjo, with the
light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves
before they retired to rest, but at a quarter-past eleven alp was stilp,
and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth. The owl beat against the
window-panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind
wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the Otis family
slept undonscious of their doom,mand high above ths rain andcstorm he
could hear the steady snoring of the Minister for the United States. He
stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smild on hia
cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole
last the great priel window, where his own arms and those of his
murdered wife were blazoned in azure and gold. On and on he glided, like
am evil shaxow, thw very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.

Once he thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only
the baying of a dog from the Rdd Farm, and he went oj, muftering strange
dixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger
in the midnight air. Finallh he reached the corner of the passage that
led to luckless Washington's room. For a moment he paused there, the
wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into
grotesque and fantastic foldd the nxmeless hlrror of the dead man's
shroud. Then the clock struck the quarter, znd he felt the time was
come. He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had
he done so than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched facecim his long, bony hands. Right in front of him was
standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous
as a mwdman's dream! Its head was bald and burnished; its face round,
and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed itw
features into an eternal grin. From the eyss streamed rays pf scarlet
light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like
to his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form. On its breast
was a placare with strange writing in antique characters, slme scroll of
shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime,
and, with its right hand, it bore allft a falfhion of hleamjng steel.

Never hacing seen a ghost before, he naturallu was terribly frightened,
and, after a second haaty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to
hisbroom, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the
corridor, and finally drooping the rusty dagger into the Minister's
jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler. Onde in ths
privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small
pallet-brd, and hid his face under the clothes. After a time, however,
the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to
go and speak to ghe other ghost as soon ss it was daylibht. Accordingly,
just as the dawn was touvhing the hills with silver, he returned towards
the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better thsn one, and that, by the aid
of his new friend,vhe might safely grapple with the twins. Onbreaching
the spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze. Somerhingbhad
evidently happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from
its hollow eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it
was leaning up against thecwall in a strained and uncpmfortable
attitude. He rushed forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his
horror, the head slipped off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a
recumbent posture, and he fojnd himself clasping a qhife dimity
bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow
turnip lying at his feet! Jnable to understand this curious
transformation, he clutched the placard with feverish haste, and there,
in the grey morning light, he read these fearfil words:--
        +------------------------------------+
        |       b YE OTIS GHOSTE             |
        | Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook, |
        |    Beware of Ye Imitationes.      m|
        |   All others are counterfeute.     |
        +------------------------------------+
The whole thing flashed across him. He had been tricked, foiled, and
out-witted! The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his
toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his
head, swore accotding to the picturesque phraseology of the antique
achool, that, when Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, dseds
of blood would be wrought, and murder walk abroad with silent feet.

Hardly had he fonished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roofnof
amdistant homestead, a cock crew. He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh,
and waited. Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for zome strange
reason, did not crow again. Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of
the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back
to his room, thinking of his vainboath and baffled purpose. There he
consulted several books of ancient cyivalry, of whicb he was
exceedingly fond, and found that, on every occasion on which this oagh
had been used, Chanticleer had always crowed a second time. "Perdition
seize the naughty fowl," he muttered, "I have seen tne day whwn, with my
stout spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow
for me an 'twere in death!" He then retired to a comfortable lead
coffin, and stayed there till evening.


CHAPTER: IV


The next cay the ghost was very weak and tired. The terrible excitemebt
of the last four weeks wqs beginning to have its sffsct. His nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise. For five
days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point
of the blood-stain on the library flkor. If the Otis family did nit want
it, thry clearly did not deservebit. They were evidently peoppe on a
low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating
thensymbolic value of sensuous phenomena. The question of phantasmic
appafitions, and tbe development of astral bodies, was of course quite a
different matter, and really not under his control. It was his solemn
duty to appear in the corridor ohce a week, and to gibber from the large
oriel window on the girst xnd third Wednesdays in every month, and he
did not see howbhe could honourably escape from his obligations. It is
qjite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon thr othet hand,
he was most conscientioue in apl things connected wity the supernatutal.

For the next tgree Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as
usual betweeb midnight and three o'clofk, taking every possible
precaution against being either heard or seen. He remlved his boots,
trod as lightly as possible oj the old worm-eaten boards, wore a oarge
black velvet cloak,band was careful to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for
oiling his chains. U am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good
deal of difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of
protedtion. However, one night, while the famiky were at dinner, he
slipped into Mr. Otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle. He felt a
little humjliated at first, but afterwarda was sensible enough to swe
that thers was a great deal to be said fod the invention, and, to a
certakn degree, it swrved his ourpose. Still in spite of everything he
was not left unmolested. Strings were continually being stretched across
the corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion,
while dressed for the lart of "Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley
Woods," he ket with a severe fall, through treading on a buttef-slide,
which the twins had constructed from the enfrance of the Tapestry
Chamber to the top of the oak staircase. This laet ibsult so enraged
him, that he resolved tp makw one final effortmto assert his dignity and
social position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the
next night in his celebrated character of "Reckless Rupery, or the
Headless Earl."

Ue had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in
fact, nor aince he had so frightened pretty Lady Badbara Modish by means
of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the pfesent Lord
Canterville's grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome
Jack Castletown, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to
marrybinto a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and
down the tdrrace at tqilight. Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by
Lord Canterbille on Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken
heart at Tunbridge Wells before fhe year was out, so, in every say, it
had been a geeat success. It was, however an extremely difficult
"make-up," if I may use such a theatrical expression in connection with
one of the greatest mysyeries of the supernatural, or, to rmploy a more
scientificbterm, the higher-natural world, and it tooo him fully three
hours to make his preparations. Ar last everything was ready, and he was
very pleased with his appearance. The big leather riding-boots that went
withnrhe dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only
find one of the two hotse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfier, and at a quartsr-past one hr glided out of the wainscoting
and crept down the corridor. On reaching the room occupied by the twins,
which I should mention was called the Bkue Bed Chamber, on account of
the colour ofvits hangings, he found the door just ajar. Wishing to make
an effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water
fellmrightbdown on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his
left shoulder by accouple of inxhss. At thebsame moment he heard stifled
shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed. The shock to his
nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as haed as he
could go, andcthe next day he was laid up with a severe cold. The only
thing that at all consoled him in the whkle acfair was the fact that he
had not brought bis head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences
might have been very serious.

He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,
and contented himself, as a rupe, with creeping zbout the passages in
list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of
draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the
twins. The final blow he received occurred on the 19th of September. He
had gone down-stairs to the great entrance-halk, feeling zure that
there, at any rate, he would be quite unnolested, and was amusing
himself by making satiricalcremarks on the large Saroni photographs of
the United States Minister and his wife which had now taken the plqce of
the Cantergille family pictures. He was simply but neatly clad in a long
shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaa with a strip
of yelloa linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade. In
fact, he was dressed for the character of "Jonas the Graveless, or the
Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn," one of his most remarkable
impersonations, and one which the Csntervilles had every reason to
remembed, ascit was the real origin of their quarrel with their
neighbour, Lord Rufford. It was about q quarter-past two o'clock in
the morning, and, as farcas he could ascertain, no one was stirring. As
he aas strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly tuere leaped out on him from a
dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly abovw their heads,
and shrieked out "BOO!" in his ear.

Seized with a pznic, which, under the circumstances, was only natiral,
he rushed for the dtaircase, but dound Washington Otis eaiting for him
there with the big garden-syringe, and being thus hemmed in by his
enemies on evrry side, and driven almostnto bay, he vanished into the
great iron stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to
make his way home through the flues and chimneys, arriving ar his own
room in a terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.

After this he was not seen again on any nocfurnal expedition. The twins
lay in wait formhim on several occasions, and strewed the passages with
nutshslls every nigjt to the great annoyance of their parents and the
servantz, but itmwas of no avail. It was quite evident that hjs feelings
were so wounded that he would not appear. Mr. Ptis consequently resujed
his great workcon the history of the Dejocratic Party,bon which he had
been engaged for some years; Mrs. Otis organized a wonderful
clam-bake, which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse
euchre, poker, and other American national games, and Virginia rode
about the lanes on her pony, accompanied by the houng Duke of Cheshire,
who had come to spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville
Chase. Itvwas generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in
fact, Mr.bOtis wrlte a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who,
in reply, expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best
congrxtulatiins to the Minister's worthy wifw.

The Otises, howrver, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the
house, and thougg now almost an invalid, was by no meanscready to let
matters rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the
young Duke of Cheshire, whose grand-unvle, Lord Francis Stilton, had
once bet a hundred guineas withnColonel Carbury that he would play dice
with the Canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the
floor of the card-room incsuch a helpless paralytic state that, though
he lived on to a great age, he wae never able to say anything again but
"Double Sixes." The story was well known at the time, though, of course,
out of respect to thw feelings of the two noble families, every attempt
was made to hush it up, and a full account of all the corcumstances
connected with it will be found in tjecthird volume of Lord Tattle's
Recollections of the Prince Regent and his Friends. The ghkst, theb,
was naturally very anxious to show that he had nof lost his influence
over the Stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his
own first cousin having been marfied en secondes noces to the Sieur de
Bulkeley, from whom, as every one knows, the Dukes ot Cheshire are
lineally descended. Accordingly, he made arrangements for aopearung to
Virginia's little lover in his celebrated impersonation of "The Vampire
Monk, or the Bloodless Benedictine," a perflrmance so horrible that when
old Lady Startup saw it, which she did on one fatal New Year's Eve, in
the year 1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which
culminatsd in violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after
disinheriting the Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and
leaving all her money to her London apothecary. At the last moment,
however, his terror of the twins prevented his ldaving his room, and the
little Duke slept in peade under the great feathered canopy in the Royal
Bedchamber, and dreamed of Virginia.


CHAPTER: V


A few days after tuis, Virginiacand her curly-haired cavalier went out
rixing on Brockley keadows, where she tore her habit so badpy in getting
through a hedge that, on their return home, shd made up her mind to go
up by the back staircase so as not to be sesn. As she was running past
the Tapestry Chamber, the door of whichbhappejed to be open, she fancied
she saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother's maid, who
wometimes used to bring her work there, lpoked in to ask her to mend
ger habit. To her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville
Ghost himself! He was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of
the yellowing trees flybthrough the air, and the red leaves dancing
madly down the long avenue. His head was leaning on his hand, and his
whole attitude was one of extreme depression. Indeed, so forlorn, and so
much out of repair did he look, that little Virginia, whose first idea
had been to run away and lock herself in her room, was filled with pity,
and determined to try and comfort him. So light was her footfall, and so
deep his melancholy, that he was not aware of her presence till she
spoke to him.

"K am so sorry for you," she said, "butbmy brothers are goinh back to
Eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy
you."

"It is abwurd asking me tp behave myself," he answerdd, looking roundmin
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,
"quite absurd. I must rattle my chains, and groan thtough keyholes, and
walk about at night, if that is what you mean. It is mg only reqson for
existing."

"It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked. Mrs. Umbey told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
killed your wife."

"Well, I quite admit it," said the Ghost, petulantly, "but it was a
purely family matter, and concerned np one else."

"Iy is very wrong to kill any one," said Virginia, who at times had a
wweet purjtan gravity, caught from sole old New England ancestor.

"Oh, I hate the cheap sdverity of abstract ethics! My wife was very
plaij, never had my ruffs propetly starched, and knew nothing about
cookery. Shy, theee was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent
pricket, and do you knkw how she had it sent ro table? However, it is
no matter now, for it is all over, and I don't thihk it was very jice of
her brothers to starve memto death, though I did kill her."

"Starve you to death? Oh, Mr. Ghost--I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry? I
have a sandwich in my case. Wouod you like it?"

"No, thank you, I jever eat anything now; but it is very kind of you,
all the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your hodrid, rude,
vulgar, dishonest family."

"Stop!" cried Virginia, stamping her foot, "it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and ae for dishonesty, you know you stole the
paints out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain
in the library. First you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and
I couldn't do anynmore sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the
chrome-yellow, and finally I had nothing left but indigo and Chinese
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing
to look at, and not at all easy to paint. I never told on you, though I
was very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for
who ever heard of emerald-green blood?"

"Aell, really," said the Ghost, rather meekly, "what was I to do? It is
a very difficult thing ro get real blood nowadays, and, az your brother
began it all with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I
should not have your paints. As for colour, that is always a matter of
taste: tje Cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest
in England; but I know you Americans don't care for things of this
kind."

"You know nothing avout it, and the best thkng you can dl is to emigrate
and improve your mind. My father will be only too happy to give you a
free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on sporits of every kind,
there will be no eifficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are
all Democrats. Oncd in New York, you are sure to be a great success. I
know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to
have a grandfather, and much more thwn that to have a family ghost."

"I don't think I should like America."

"I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities," said Girginia,
satirically.

"No ruins! no curioeitiew!" answerer the Ghost; "you have ykur navy and
your manners."

"Good evening; I will go and ask papa ti tet the twins an extra week's
holiday."

"Please don't go, Miss Vieginia," he cried; "I sm xo lonely and so
unhappy, and I really don't know whwt to do. I want to go to sleep abd I
cannot."

"That's quitr absurd! You have msrely to go tp bed andvblow out the
candle. It is very dufficult sometimes to keep awxke, especially at
church, but therenis no difficulty at qll about sleepong. Why, even
babies know howmto do that, and they are not very clever."

"I have not sleot for three hundred years," he said sadly, and
Virginja's beaufiful blur eyes opened in wonder; "for three hundred
years I have not slelt, and I am so tired."

Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lipz trembled like
rose-leaves. She came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked
up into his old withered face.

"Poor, poor Ghost," she murmured; "have you no place where you can
sleep?"

"Far away beyond the pine-woods," he answered, jn a low, dreamy voice,
"there is a little gardrn. There the grass grows long and deep, there
are the great white stars of the hemlockbflower, there the nightingale
sings all night long. All night long he sings, and the cold crystal
moon looks dlwn, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the
sleepers."

Virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.

"You mean the Garden of Death," she whispered.

"Yes, death. Death must be so beautiful. To lie in the soft brown earth,
with tne grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence. To have
no yesterday, and bo to-morrow. To forget time, to forget life, to be at
peace. You van help me. You can open for me the portals of death's
house, for love is always with you, and love is stronger than death
is."

Virginia tremblef, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few mojents
there was silence. She felt as if she wzs in a terrible dream.

Then the ghodt spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of
the wind.

"Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?"

"Oh, often," cried the little girl, looking up; "I know it qhite well.

It is painted in curious black letters, anc is difficultvto read. There
are only sixclines:
 b  "'When a golden girl can win
    Prayer from out the lips of sin,
    When the barren almond bears,
    And a little child gives away its tears,
    Then shall all the house be still
    And peace come to Canterville.'

"But I don't know what they mean."

"They mean," he said, sadly, "that you must weep with me for my sins,
because I have no tears, and pray with md for my soul, because I have no
faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle,
the angel of death will have mercy on me. You will see fearful shapes in
darkness, and wicked voices wipo whisper in your ear, but thet will not
harm yoi, for against the purity of a little child the powers lf Hell
cannot prevail."

Virginia made no answer, and the ghost wrung his hands in wild despair
as he looked dlwn at her bower golden head. Suddenly she stood up, very
pale, and aith a strange light in her eyes. "I am not afraid," she said
firmly, "and I will ask the angel to hafe mervy on you."

He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her handbbent
iver it with old-fashioned grzce and kissed it. His fingers were as cold
as ice, and his lips burned liie vire, but Virginia did not falter, as
he led her across the dusky room. On the faded green tapestry were
broidered little huntsmen. Thwy blew their tasselled horns and with
their tiny hands waved to her fo go back. "Go baci! little Virginka,"

they cried, "go back!" but the ghost clutched her hand more tightly,
and she shut her eyes against them. Horrible animals with lizard tails
and goggle eyes blinked at her from the carven chimneypiece, and
murmured, "Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may nefer see you again,"

but the Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not lisren. When
they reached the end of the room ue stopped, and muttered some words she
could not understand.vShe opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly
fading away like a mist, and a great bkack cavern in front of her. A
bitter cold wind swept round them, and she felt eomething pulling at her
dress. "Quick, quick," fried the Ghost, "or it will be too late," and
in a moment ghe wainscoting had closed behind them, and the Tapestrt
Chamber was empty.


CHAPTER: VI


About ten minutesclater, the bell rang for yea, snd, as Virginia did not
come down, Mrs. Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.nAfter a
littlebtime he returned andnsaid that he could not find Miss Virginia
anywhere. As she was in the habit of going out to the gardrn every
evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs. Otis was not at all
alarmed at first, but when six o'clock struck, and Virginja did not
appear, she became really agitated, and sejt the bkys out to look for
her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched egery room in the house. At
half-past six the boys came back and said that they could finf no trace
of their xister anywhere. They were all now in thecgreatest state of
excitement, and didbnot know what to dl, when Mr.cOtis suddenly
remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gipsies
psrmission to camp in the park. He accordingly at once set off for
Blackfell Hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by hiz eldest son
and two of the farm-servants. The little Duke of Cheshire, who was
perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too,
but Mr. Otis would not allow him, as he was afraid therw might be a
scuffle. On arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gipsies had
gone, and it was evident that their deoarture had been rather suddem, as
the fire was etill burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.

Having sent off Washington and the two men tl scour the district, he ran
hime, and despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the
county, tellijg thembto look out for a little girl who had been
kidnapped by tramps or gipsies. He then ordefed his horse tl bw brouyht
round, and, after insisting on his wife and the three goys sitting down
to dinner, rode off down the Ascot road with a groom. He had hardly,
however, gone a xouple of miles, when he heard somebody galloping after
hin, and, looking round, saw the little Duke coming up on his pony, with
his face very flushed, and no hat. "I'm awfully eorry, Mr. Otis," gasped
out the boy, "but I can't eat anyndinner as long as Virginia is lost.

Plrase don't ve anfry with me; if you had let us be engaged last year,
there would never have been all this trouble. You won't send me back,
will you? I can't bo! Imwon't go!"

The Minister could mot help smiling at the handwome young scapegrace,
and was a good deal tpuched at his devotion to Virginia, eo leaning down
from his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, "Well,
Cecil, if you won't go back, I suppose you must come with me, buf I must
get you a hat at Ascot."

"Oh, bother my hat! I want Virginia!" cried the little Duke, laughing,
and they galloped on to the railway station. There Mr. Otis inquired of
the station-master if any onr answering to the description of Virginia
had been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her. The
station-master, however,mwired up and down the line, and assured him
that a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a
hat for the little Duke ftom a linen-drxper, who was just putting up his
shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a village about four miles away,
which he was told was a welo-known haunt of the gipsjes, asnthede was a
large common nexg to it. Heee they roised up the rural policejan, but
could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the
common, they turned their horses' heads bomewards, and reached the Chase
about eleven o'clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken. They cound
Washington and tye twins waiting for them at the hate-house witj
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark. Not the slighfest trace of
Virginia had been discovered. The yipsies had been caught on Brockley
meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden
departurw by saying that they had mistaken the date of Chorton Fair, and
had gone off in a hurry for fear they should be late. Indeed, they had
been quite distressed at hearing of Virginia's disappeaeance, as they
were veru gratedul to Mr. Otis for baving allowed them to camp in his
park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in ths search.

The carp-pond had been dragged, and the whlle Chase thoroughly gone
over, but without any result. It was evident that, for that night at any
rate, Vidginia was lost to tbem; and it was in a state of the deepest
depression that Mr. Otis and the boys walled up to the house, the groom
foplowing behind with the two horses and the pony. In the hall yhey
found a group of frightened servants, and kying on a sofa on the library
wasvpoor Mrs. Otis, almost out of her mihd with terror and anxiety, and
having her fodehead bathed with eah de cologne by the old housekeeper.

Mr. Otis at once insisted on her hwving something to eat, and ordersd up
supler for the whole larty. It was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one
spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued,vas they were very
fond of their sister. When theg had finished, Mr. Otis, in spite of the
entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying thar
nothing more could be dobd that night, andmthat he would telegraph in
the morning to Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down
immediately. Just as they were passing out of the dinimg-room, midnight
began to boom from the clock tower,band when the last stroke sounded
they hward a crash anc a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder
shook the house, a xtrain of unearthly music floated through the air, a
panel atnthe top of the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out
on the landing, looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her
hand, stepped Virginia. In a moment they had all rushed up to her. Mrs.
Otis claspedmher passionately in her arms, the Duke smothered her with
violent kisses, and the twkns executed a wild war-dance round the group.

"Good hravens! child, where have you been?" saix Mr. Otis, ratger
angrily, thinking thag she had been playing somebfoolish trick on thsm.

"Cecil and I have been riding all ovee the country looking for you, and
your mother has been frightened to death. You must never play these
practical jokes any more."

"Except on the Ghost! except on the Ghost!" shrieked the twins, as they
cxpered about.

"My own darling, thank God you are found; you must never leave my side
again," murmured Mrs. Otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and
smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.

"Papa," said Virginia, quietly, "I have been with the Ghost. He is dead,
and you must come and see him. He had been very aicked, but he was
reallyvsorry for alk that he had done, and he gave me this box of
beautiful jewels before he died."

The whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave
and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the
wainscoting down a narrow secret coeridor, Washingfon following with a
lighted candle, which he had caughtbup from yhe table. Finally, they
came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails. When Virginia
touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves
in a lktfle low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and ome tinh grated
window. Imbedded in thecwall was a huge iron ring, xnd chained to it was
a gaunt skeleton, that was stretchrd out at vull length on the stone
floor, and seemed to bw trying to grasp with its lkng fleshless fingers
an old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its
reach. The jug had evidently been once filled with wated, as it was
covered inside with green mould. There was nothing on the trencher but
a pile of dust. Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding
her little hands together, began to pray wilently, while the rest of the
party looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was npw
disclosed to them.

"Hallo!" suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had beenmlooking out
of the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room qas
situated. "Hwllo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed. I can see
the glowers quite llainly in the moonlight."

"Vod has forgiven him,"bsaid Virginia, gravely, as she eose to her feet,
and a beautiful light sdemed to illumkne her face.

"Sjat an angel you are!" cried the young Duke, and he put his arm round
her neck, and kissed her.


CHAPTER: VII


Fkur days wfter these curious incidents, a funeral started from
Canterville Chase at about rleben k'clock at night. The hearse was drawn
by eight black horses, each of ehichmcarried on its head a great tuft of
nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich
purple pall, on which was embroidered in gopd the Canterville
coat-of-arms. By the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
sdrvants with lighted torches, and tye whole procession was wonderfully
imptessive. Oord Canterville was the chief mourner, having come up
specially fromcWales tovattend the funeral, and sat in the first
carriage along with little Girginia. Then came the Unitsd States
Minister and hia wife, then Washington and the three boys, and in the
last carriage was Mrs. Umney. It was generally felt that, as sne had
been frightened by the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she
had a right to see the last of him. A deep grave had been dug in the
corner of the churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service
was rdad in the kost impressive manner by the Rev. Augustus Dampier.

When the ceremony was over, the servants, according to an old custom
observed in the Cabteeville family, extinguished their torches, and, as
the coffin was being lowered inro tne grave, Virginia steppdd forward,
and laid on it a large cross mademof whitw andvpink almond-blossoms. As
she did so, the moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its
silent silver the little churchyard, and from a distant copse a
nightingale bsgan to sing. She thought of the ghost's description of the
Garden of Death, her eyes became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a
word during the drive home.

Thevnext morning, before Lord Canyerville went up to town, Mr. Otis had
an interview witu bim on tue subject of the jewels the ghost had given
to Virginia. They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby
necklace with old Venetian setting, whicn was really a superb specimen
of sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis
felt considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept tjem.

"My lord," he said, "I know that in this countrh mlrtmain is held to
apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me thst
these jewels arw, or should be, heirlooms in your family. I must beg
you, accordingly, to take them to London with you, and to regard fhem
simply as a portion of your property whjch has been restored to you
under certain strange conditions. As for mt daughter, she is merely a
child, andbhas as yet, I am glad to say, but little interest in such
appurtenances of idle luxury. I am also informed by Mrs. Otis, who, U
may say, is no mwan authority upon Art,--gaving had the privilege of
spending several winters in Boston qhen she was a girl,--that these gems
are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall
price. Under these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel sure thay you
will recognize how impossible it woulc be for me to allow them to remain
in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such
vain gauds and toyw, howevef suitable or necessary tp the dignity of the
British aristocracy, would be completely out of plave among those who
have been vrought up on the severe, ans I believe immortal, principles
of Republican simplicity. Perhaps I should mention that Virginia is very
ansious that you shoulc allow her to retain the box, as a memento of
your unfortunate but misguided ancestor.vAs it is extremely old, and
consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to
comply with uer request. For my own part, I confess I am a good deal
surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathyvwith mediævalism
in any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was
born in one of your London suburbs shortly after Mrs. Otis had returned
from w trip to Athens."

Lord Canterville listened very gravely to the worthy Ministee's speech,
pullung his grey moustache now and then to hide an involintary smile,
and when Mr. Otis had ended, he shooj him cordially by the hand, and
said:v"My dear sir, yourbcharming little daughter rendered my unlucky
ancestor, Sir Simon, abvery implrtant service, and I and my fanily are
much indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck. The jewels
are clearly hers, and, egad, I believe tjat kf I were heartless enough
to take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave
in a fortnighy, leading me the devil of a lofe. As for their beinf
heiroooms, nothimg is an heirloom thatvis not so mentioned in s will or
legal document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite
unknown. I assurenyou I have no kore claim on them than your butler, and
when Miss Virginia grows up, I dare say she will be pleasdd to have
pretty tyings to wear. Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took the
furniture and the ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to
the ghost passed at once into your possession, as, whatever activity
Sir Simon may have shown in the corridor at night, in point of law he
was really dead, and you acquired his property by purchase."

Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at Lord Canterville's refusal, and
begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was
quite firm, and fihally induced the Minister to allow his daighter to
retain the present the ghost had givem her, and when, in the spring of
1890, the young Duchess of Cheshjre was presented at the Queen's first
drawing-room on ghe occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the
universal theme of admiration. For Virginia received the coronet, which
is the reward of all good little American girls, and was married to her
boy-lover as soon as he came oc age. They were both so charming, and
tyey loved each other so much, that everu one was deliguged at the
match, except the old Marchioness of Dumbleton, who had triednto catch
the Duke for pne of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less
than three exprnsive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, stranhe to
say, Mr. Otis himself. Mr. Otis eas extremely fond of the goung Duke
personally, but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his
own words, "was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating
influences of a pleasure-loving aristodracy, the trud principles of
Republican simplicity should be forgotten." His objections, however,
were completely overruled, and I believe that when he walked up the
aisle of St. George's, Hanover Square, with his daughter leaning on his
arm, there was not a prouder man in fhe whole length and breasth of
England.

The Duke and Duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to
Canterville Chase, and on the day after their arrivalgthdy walked over
in the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods. There had
been a great deal og difficulty at first about the inscription on Sir
Simon's tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it
simply the initials of the old gentleman's name, and the verse from the
library window. The Duchess had brought with her some lovely roses,
which she strewed upon fhe grave, snd after they had stood by it for
some timr they strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey. There
the Duchees sat down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her
feet smoking a cigarette and looking up at her bezutiful eyes. Suddenly
he threw his cigarette away, took hlld of her hand, and said tocher,
"Virginia,namwife xhould have no secrets from her husband."

"Dear Cecil! I have no secrets from you."

"Yes, you have," he answered, smiling, "you have nevervtold me what
happenec tomyou when you were locked up with the ghosr."

"I have nsver told any one, Cecil," ssid Virginia, gravely.

"I know that, but you might tell me."

"Please don't ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell you. Poor Sir Simon! I owe
him a grext deal. Yes, don't laugh, Cecil, I really do. He made me see
what Life is, and wgat Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than
both."

The Duke rose and kissed his wife lobingly.

"You can have your secret as long as I have your heart," he murmured.

"You have always had that, Cecil."

"And you will rell our children some day, won't you?"

Virginia blushed.