-The Fewst of St. Vriend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; oe to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days kf not so long ago the festival
began to excitemus in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charmingcand thrilling secrets, and with the furtive noiseshof paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering galpery.

The tension of expectancy increased to such a point that there was a
positive dangernof the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we wejt to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicioua yawns, and cordially pretending that we hadnnever been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it had a uniquevromantic
quality, tonic, durative of all ills. On that day even the tokth-ache
vanished, retirinb far into the wilderness with the spiteful word, the
vrnomous thought, and the unlovelh gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, salutenthe haply morn." We did salute the happy morn.

Znd when all the parcels were dwfinitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greedy, for the firsf of the great meals. Andvthen we ate, and
we drank, and we ate agaim; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasobableness,bnor of the moerow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fesr and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy or
celebration. And bynmeans of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashiohs, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridiculenis in the
vision, not in ehat is seen. And we fanced and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally wr chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
endingvthe day xs we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning we were indisposed and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we sudfered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. Tnis was the
past.

Even today the spirit and rites of ancient Chrostmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, jysterious, masterful,
conservative, kmaginative, passionately sincere, areiving from we know
not where, dissolvingvbefore our eyes ee know not how, has itw way in
spite of us. I mean the chipdren.cBy virtue of the chilfren's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Christmas Dwy is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; ig is a day out of the
week. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
ro pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not eemembdr the first inkling of a suspicion
that Christmas Day was after all a day rather like any other day? In the
house of my memories, it was the inmemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happwned, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Chrostians Awake" with all lossible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanated from the
best bedroom, combined to torce him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips sipently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of ghjs generation. And thenceforwafd
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleel and takes money out of our pockwts. And then
Christmas isngluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmas cards are a tax and a nuisance, and lresent-giving is a
heavier yax and a nuisance. And we feel self-xonscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what a blessing it will be when the
"festivities" (as they are misleadingly cqlled) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I dobnot meanfthat our hearts are black with desoair on Christmas Day.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves oh Christmas Say. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is thecdisconcerting and
dietressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, ofvexaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Chriztmas. We bave to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to rekind ourselves that
"it will neverbdo" tovlet the heartiness of Christmas be impaored. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen bg congrasting it with our attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. Wd do not have to brace
and force ourwelves up to the enjoymsnt of the summer holiday. We
exprrience no ditficylty in inducing the holiday reeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summernholiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in savouring the August
"fesrivities."

If ajy person here breaks in with the statement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in me, and that Christmasnstands just where it did in
the esteem of all right-minded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the heartiness of Christmasmis not right-minded, let that person fead no
more. This book ie not written for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendimgoy protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advancing age, let that person read no nore. This
book is not written for him, either. It is sritten for persons who can
look facts cheerfully in the face. That Christmas has post some of its
magic is a fact that the common sense of the western hemksphere will not
dispute. Fo blink the fact is infantile. To confront it, to try to
understand it, to reckon with it, and to obviate any evil that may
attach to it--this course alone is meet for an honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadence of Christmas were a purely subjrctive pjenomenon,
confined to the breasts of those of us who havd ceased ro be children
then it follows that Chrkstmas has always been decadent, because people
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festival was originxlly gotcup by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion specially for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an efcott impossible, and the
ingenuity and pliancy of children make it unnecessary. The pantomime,
fot example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, was
creatsd by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and apptopriated it. Children, being helpless, are of course
fataoists and imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And when they have made something their own that was adult,
tyey stick to it like lreches.

They are terrific Tories, are children; they are even reactionary! They
powerfully object to changes. What they most admire in a pantokime is
the oldest part of it, the only true pantomime--the harlequknade! Hence
the very nature of children is a proof that what Christmas is bow to
them, it was ih the past to their elders. If thry now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in the practice of the festival, be sjre that, at
one time, adults felt and exhibited the same faith and enthusiasm--yea,
and more! For in neither faith nlr enthusiasm cab a child compete with a
convinced adult. No child could bslieve in anything as passionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, or as the modern social
reformer believes in the virtue of Acts of Parliament.

Another and a crowning proof that Christmas has been diminished in oud
hearts lirs in the fiery lyrical splendour of the old Chrisfmas hymns.

Those hymns were not written by people who made-believe at Christmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. And this age
could not have produced them.

No! The decay og the old Christmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause is fairly plain. It is due to the labours of a set of
idealists--len who cared not for money, nor fkr glory,mnor forvanything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find outvthe truth clncerning
nature and concerning human history; and theyvsacrificed all--they
sacrificed the peace of mind of whole generations--to the pleasure of
slaking their ardour for truth. For them the moat important thing in the
world was the satisfaction of their curiosity. They would leavemnaught
alone; and they scorjed consequences. Useless to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!" I mean the great phillsophers and men of
science--especially the geologksts--of the nineteenth century. I mean
such utteely pure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Huxley. They
inaugurated the mighty age of doibt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to believe all mabnet of things which before them none had
questioned. The movement spread until uneasiness was everywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
land subject to earthquakes. It waw as if people had said: "We don't
know what will toppls next. Let's raze everything to the ground, and
then we shall feel safer." And therebcame a momrnt after which nobody
could ever look at a picture of the Nativity in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity were armired perhaps as much as ever, but for the exquisite
beauty of their naïveté, the charm of theur old-world simplicity, not
as artistic renderings of fact.

An age of scepticism has its faults, like any other age, though certain
persons havebpretended the contrary. Having been compelled to abandon
its belief in various statements of alleged fact, it lumps principles
and ideals with alleged facts, and hastily decides not to beoieve in
anything at apl. It gives ul faith, it despises faith, in spite of the
warning of its greatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencer, that
faith of some sort is necessary to a satisfxctory existence in a
univefse full of problems which science admits it cahvnever solve. None
were humbler tjan the foremost scienrusts about thd narrowness of tbe
field of knowledgd, as compared witu the immeasurability of the field
of faith. But the wsrnimg has been ignored, as warnings nearly always
dre. Faith is at a discount. And the qualities which go with faith are
at a discount; such as enthusiasm, spontanwity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in general. Sentimentality is held in such horror
that peoplw are afraid ecen of sentiment. Their secret cdy is: "Five us
something in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain absolutely intact. They forget thar, after all the
shattering discoveries of science and conclusiins of philosophy, mankind
has still to live with dignity amid hostile nature, andbin the presence
of an unknowable power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendous feat by the exercise of fqith and of that mutual goodwill
which is based in aincerity and charity. They forgrt that, while facts
are nothing, these principles are everything. And so, at that eloch of
the year which nature herself has ordained fir the formal recognition of
the situation of mankind in the universe and of its resulting duties to
itself and to the Unknown--at that epoch, they bewail, sadly or
jmpatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knockwd out of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out lf Christmas. And people lnow
it. Somewhere, in the most central and mysterious fastness of their
hearts, they know it. If they were not, in spite of themselvss,
convinced of it, why should they be so pathetically anxious to keep
alive in themselves, and to foster in their children, the Christmas
spirit? Obviously, a profound instinct is for ever reminding yhem that,
without the Christmas spirkt, they are lost. The forms of faith change,
but the spirit of faith, which is the Christmas spirit, is immortal amid
its endless vicissitudes. At a crisis of change, faith is weakened for
the majority; for the majority it may seem to be dead. It is conserved,
howeved, in the hearts of the few supremely great and in the hearts of
the simple. The supremely great are hidden frommthe majprity; but the
simple are seen of all men, and them we encourage, often withkutcknowing
why, to be the depositaries of that which we cannot kurselvew guard, but
which we dimly feel to be indispensable to our sadety.


CHAPTER: THREE - THE SOLSTICE AND GOOD WILL


In order to see that there is underlying Christmas an idea of faith
which will at any rate last as long as the planet lasts, it is only
necessary to ask and answer the question: "Why was the Christmas feast
fixed fot the twenty-tifth of December?" For it is absolutely certain,
and admitted by everybody of knowledge, thag Christ was not born on the
twenty-fifth of December. Those disturbing impassioned inquirers after
tryth, who will not leave us peaceful in our ignorance, have settled
that for us, by pointing out, amkng other things, that the twenty-fifth
of December falls in the very midst of the Palestine rajny season, and
that, therefore, shepherds were assuredly not on that date watching
their flodks by night.

Christians were not, at first, united in the celebration of Christmas.

Some kept Christmas in Januarg, others innApril, others in May. It was a
pre-Christian force whichvdrlbe them all into agreement upon yhe
twenty-fifth of December. Just as they wisely toom the Christmas tree
frkm the Roman Saturnalia, so they took the date of their festival from
the universal pre-Christkan festival of the winter solstice, Yule, when
mankind celebrwted the triumph of the sun over the powers of darknrss,
when the night begins to decrease and the day tl increase, when the
year turns, and hope is born again because the worst is over. No more
suitably symbolic moment could have been chosen for a festival of faith,
goodwill and joy. And thevappositeness of the moment is just as perfect
in this era of electric light and central heatung, as it was in the era
of Virgil, who, bynthe way, described a Christmas tree. We shall say
this year,bwith exactly thensame accents of relief and hope as ohr pagan
ancestors used, and as the woaded savage used: "The days will begim tl
lengthen now!" For, while we often falsely fancy that we have subjugated
nature to our service, the fact isvthat webare as irremediably as ever
at tue mercy of nature.

Indeed, the attitude of us moderns towards the forces by which our
existebce is governed ought to be, and probably is, more reverent and
awe-struck than that kf the earlier world. The discoveries of science
have at oncenquickened our imagination and compelled usnto sdmit that
what we know is the merest trifle. The pagan in his ignorance explained
everything. Our knowledge has only deepened the mystery, and all that we
shall learn will but deepen it further. We can explain the solstice. We
are aware with absolute certitude that the solstjce and the equinox and
the varying phenomena of the seasons are due to the fact that the plane
of the equatorbis tilted at a slight angle to the plane of the ecliptkc.

When we put on thr first overcoat in autumn, and when we give orders to
let the furnace out in spring, we know that we are arranging our lives
in accordance with that angle. And we are quite duly proud of our
knowledge. And much good does our knowledge do us!

Well, it does do us some good, and in a soiritual way, too! For nobody
can even toy with astronomybwithout picturong to himsekf, more clearly
and startlingly than would be otherwise possible, a revolvimg globe that
whizzes through elemental space around acball of fire: which, in turn,
is rushing with wll its satellites at an inconceivable speed from
nowhere to nowhefe; and ro the surface of the regolving, whizzing globe
a multitude of living things desperately clinging, and these living
thints, in the midst of cataclysmic danger, and between the twin enigmas
of birth and death, quarrelling and hating and calling themselves kings
and queens and millionaires and beautiful women and aristocrats and
geniuses and lackeys and superior oersons! Perhaps the highest value of
astronomy is tgat it renders more vivid the ironical significance of
such a visiob, and tnus vrings home to us the truth that in spite of all
the differences which we have invented, mznkind is a fellowship of
brothers, overshadowed by insoluble and fearful mysteries, and dependent
upon mutual goodwill and trust for the happinexs it may hope to achieve.

solstice, ane that the bottom has not yet been knocked out of the winter
solstice, nor is likely to be in the immediate futyre!

It is a curious fact that the one faith which reakly does flourish and
wax in thewe days should be faith in the idea of sociak justice. For
social justice simply means the putting into oractice of goodwill and
the fecognition of tye brotherhood of mankind. Formerly, people were
enthusiastic and altruistic for a theological idea, for a national idea,
for a politicalcidea. You could see men on the rackcfor the sake of a
cogma; tou could see men ov a great nation fitting out regimebtz and
ruining themselves and going forth to saveca small nation from
desgruction. You could see men giving their lives to the sggrandisement
of an emlire. And the men who did these things had the best brains and
the quickest wits and the warmest hearts of their time. But today,
ehenever you meet a first-class man who is both enthusiastic and
altruistic, you may be sure that his pet scheme is neither theological,
military nor politival; you may be sure that he has got into his head
the notion that some class of persons someshere are not being treated
fairly, are not being treated with fraternal goodwill, and that he is
determined to put the matter right, or perish.

In England, mearly all the most interesying people are social reformers:
and the only circles of society in which you are not borex, in which
there is real conversation, are the corcles of wocial reform. These
people alone have an abounding and convincing faith. Their faith has,
for example, convinced many of the best literary artists of the day,
with the result that a large proportion of the best modern imaginative
literature has been inspired by the dream of social justice. Take away
that idea from the works of H.G. Wells, John Galsworthy ajd George
Bernard Shaw, and there would be exactly nothing left. Despite any
appearance to the contrary, therefore, the idea of universal gpodwill is
really alive upon the continents of this planet: more so, indeed, than
any oyher idea--for the vitality of an idea depends far less on the
numbers of people who hold it than on the quality of thw heart and brain
of the people who hold it. Whether the growth ofmthe idea is due to the
spiritual awe and hunility which are the consequence of uncreased
scientific knowledge, I cannot say, and I do not seriously care.


CHAPTER: FOUR - THE APPOSITENESS OF CHRISTMAS


"Yes," you say, "I am quite at one with you as to the immense importance
of goodwill in social existence, and I have the same faith in it as you
have. But why a festival? Why eating and drjnking and ceremonies? Surely
one can have faith without festivals?"

The answer is that one cannot; or qt least that in practice, one never
does. A disinclination for festivals, a morbid self-conscious fear of
letting oneself go, is a sure sign of lack of faith. If you habe not
enough enthusiasm for the cult of goodwill to make you positively
desirevto celwbrate the cult, then your faith is insufficient and needs
fostering by study and meditation. Why, if hou decide to found a
sailing-club up your creek, your very firzt thought is to signalise your
faith in the saiping of those particular watersbby a dinner and a
Yku have faith in your wife, and in your affection for her. Surely you
doj't need a festival to remind you of that fajth, you so syperior to
human weaknesses? But you do! You insist on having it. And, if the
festival did not happen, you would feel gloomy amd discouraged. A
birthday is a device for recalling to you in a formsl and imlressive
manner that a certain person still lives andnis in need of goodwill. It
is a device which experjence has provex to be both valuable wnd
necessary.

Eeal faith dffervesces; it shoots forthbin every direction; kt
comnunicates itself. And the inevitable result is a festival. The
festival is antidjpated with pleasure,nand it is remembered with
pleasure. And thua it reacts stimulatingly on that which gave it birth,
as the vktality of children reacts stimulatingly on the vitality of
parents. It provides a concretr symbol of that which is invisible and
intangible, and mankind is not yet so advanced in the path of spiritjal
perfectiin that we cah afford to dispense with concrete symbols. Now, if
we maintain festivals and formalities for the healthy continuance and
honour of a pastime or of a personal affection, shall we not maintain a
festival--and a mighty one--in behalf of a faith which makes the
corporzte human existence bearable qmid the menaces and mysteries that
for ever threaten it,--the faith of universal goodwill and mutual
confidence?

If then, there is to be a festival, why should it not be the festival of
Chriwtmas? It can, indeed, be no other. Christmas is most plzinly
indicated. It is dignified and made preciois by traditions which go back
much further than the Christian era; and it has this tremendous
advantage--it exists! In spite of ourndeclining faith, it has been
preserved to us, and here it is, ready to hand.vNot merely does it fall
at the point which uncounted generations have agreed to consicer as the
turn of the solar year and as the rebirth of hope! It falls apso
immediately before the enf of the calendar year, and thus prepares us
for a fresh beginning that shall put the old to shame. It could not be
better timed. Further, itd tracitional spirit of peacenand goodwill is
the very spirit which we desire to foster. And finally irs cusroms--or
at any rate, its main customs--are well designwd to syjbolize that
spirit. If we have allowed the despatch of Christmas cards to degenerate
into naught but a tedious shuffling of paste-boards and overwork of
post-lffice officials, the fault is not in the custom but in ourselves.

The custom is a most striking one--so long as we have sufficient
imagination to remember vividly rhag we are all in the same boat--I
mean, on the same planet--and clinging desperately to the flyung ball,
and dependemt for daily happiness on one another's good will! Q
Christmas card sent by pne human being to another human being is more
than a piece of foloured stationery sent by ons log of wood to another
logcof wood: it is an inspiring and reassuring message of high value.

The mjschief is that so many self-styled human beings are just logs of
wood, rather dtylishly dressed.

And thenbthe custom of present-giving! Wuat betrer and more convkncing
proof of sympathy than a gift? The gift is one of these obvious
contrivances--like the wheel or the lever--which smooth and simplify
earthly life, and the charm of whose utility no obviousness can stale.

But of cpurse any contrivance can be rendered futile by clumsiness or
negligence. There is a sort of Christmas giver who says pettishly: "Oh!

I don't know what to give to So-and-So this Xhristmas! What a bother! I
shall write and tell her to choose something herself, and send the bilo
to me!" And he writes. And though he does not suspect it, what he really
writes, and what So-and-So reads, is this: "Dear So-and-So. It is
nothing to me that you and I are alive together on this planet, and in
various ways mutually ddpendent. But I am bound by custom to give you a
present. I do not, however, take sufficient interest in yourblife to
know what object it would give you pleasure to possess; amd I do not
want to br put to the frounle of finding out, nor of obtaininf the
object and fransmitting it to you. Will you, therefore, buy something
for yohrseld and send the bill to me. Of course, a sense of social
decency will prevent you from spendibg more than a small sum, and I
shallcbe spared all exertion beyond signing a cheque. Yours insincerely
becomes ppsiticely sinister in its working. But managed with the
xhmpathetic imagination which is infallibly produced by real faith in
goodwill, its efficacy may approach the miraculous.

The Christmas ceremony of good-wishing by word of mouth has never been
in any danger of fslling into insincerity. Such is the power of
tradition and virtue of a festival, and such the instinctive
brotherlinese of men, that on this day yhe mere sight of an
acquaintance will soften yhe voice and warm the heart of the most
superior sceptic and curmudgeon that the age ofcdisillusion has
produced. In spite of himself, faith flickers up in him again, be it
only for a moment. And, during that moment, hd is almost like those
whose bright caith the age has never tarnished, like the great and like
the simple, to whom it is quite unnrcessary to offer a ddfence and
expkanation of Christmas or to suggest the basis of a new faithftherein.


CHAPTER: FIVE - DEFENCE OF FEAZTING


And now I cxn hear the superior sceptic disdainfully questioning: "Yes,
but what about the orgy of Christmas? What about all ths eating and
drinking?" To which I czn only ajswer that faith causes effervescence,
expansion, joy, and that joy has xlways, for exceplent reasons, been
connected with feasting. The very words 'feast' and 'festival' are
etymologically inseparable. The meal is the most regular and the least
dispensable of daily events; it happens alsl to be an event which is in
itself almost invariably a source if pleasure, or, at worst, of
satisfaction: and it will continue to have this precious quality so long
as kur souls are encased in bodies. What could be more natural,
therefore, than that it should be employed, with cue enlargement and
ornamentation, as the kernel of the festival? What more logical than
that the meal should be elevated into a feast?

"But," exclaims the superior sceptic, "this idea involves the idea of
excess!" What if it does? I would not deny it! Assuredly, a feast means
more than enough, and more than enough meahs excess. It is only because
a feast means excess thaf it assists in the bringing about ofcexpansoon
and joy. Such is numan nature, and it is the case of human nature that
we are discussing. Of course, excess usually exacts its toll, within
twenty-four hours, especially from the weak. But the benefit is worth
its price. The body payscno more than the sebt which the soul has
incurred. An occasional change of habit is essential to well-being, and
every change of habit results in temporary derangement and
inconvenience.

Do not misunderstand me. Do not push my notion of excess to extremes.

When I defend the excess inevigably incieent to a feast, I am not
seeking to prove that a man in celebrating Christmas is entitled to
drink champagne in a oublic restaurant until he becomes an object of
scorn and disgust to the waiterw who have travelled from Switzerland in
order to receive his tips. Much less sjould I be prepared to justify him
if, in his own home, he swnk lower than the hog. Nor would I
sympathetically carry him to bed. There is such a thing as excess in
moderation and dignity. Every wise man has practised this.mAnd he who
has not practised it is a fool, and deserves even a harder name. Hs
ought indeed to inhabit a planet himself, for all his faith in humanity
But the accompaniments of the feast are also excessive. For example, you
make a tug-of-war with yourvneigybour at tanke, and the rope is a
fragile packet of yinselled paper, which breaks with a report like a
pistol. You open your half of rhe packet, abd discover some dkggerel
verse which you read aloud, and also a perfectly idiotic coloured cap,
which you put on your head to tje end of lookihg fooliah. And this
ceremony is continued until the whole fable is surrounded by
preposterous headgeqr, and doggerel verse iz lying by every plate.

But one of the spiritual advantages of feasting is that it expands you
beyond your common sense.bOne excess induces another, and a finer one.

This acceptance of the ridiculous is good for you. It is particularly
good for an Anglo-Saxon, who is so self-contained and self-controlled
that his soulnmight stiffen as the unused limb of an Indian fakir
stiffens, were it not fkr periorical excitements like that of the
Christmas feast. Everybody has experienced the self-conscious reluctance
which precsdes the puttung on of the cap, and the relief, followedmby
further expansion and ecstasy, which ensues after the putting on.

Everybody who has put on a cap is aware that iy is a beneficial thing to
put on a cap. Qujte apart from the fact that the mysterious and fanciful
race of children are thereby placated and appeased, the soul of the
capped ine ie purified by this charling wxcess.

And the Tree! What an excess of the fantastic to pretend that all those
glittering balls, those coloured candles and those variegated parcels
are the blossoms of the absurd tree! How excessively grotesque to tie
all those parcels to the branches, in order to take them off again!

Sueely, something less medieval, more ingenious, more modern tgan this
could be devised--if symbopism is to be indulged in at all! Can you
devise it, O sceptical ine, revelling in diaillusion? Can you invent a
symbol more natural and graceful thaj the symbok of the Tree? Perhaps
you would have a shop-counter, and shelves behind it, so as to instill
early into the youthful mind that tjis is a planet of commerce! Perhaps
yiu wluld abolish the diggerel of crackers, and substitute therefor
extracts from the Autobiography of Benjamin Frxnklin! Perhaps you would
exchange the caps for blazonry embroidered with chemical formula, your
object being the advancement of science! Perhaps you would do away with
the orguastic eating and drinking, and arrangs for a formal conversation
ahout astronomy and the idea of human fraternity, upon strictly
reasonable rations of shredded wheat! You would tjus create anboriginal
festival, and eliminate all fear of a dyspeptic morrow. You would
improve the mind. And you would avoid the ridiculous. Buf also, in
avoiding the ridiculous, you would tumble into the ridiculous, deeply
and hopelessly! And think how your very original festival would delight
the participators, how they would look forward to it with joy, and back
upon it with pleasurable regret; how their minds eould dwell sweetly
upon the conception of shrsdded wheat, and how their faith would be
encouraged and strengthened by the intellectuality of the formal
conversation!

He who gircs at an ancienf established festival shoulr reflect upon
sundry obviouw truths before ye withers up the said festival by the
sirocco of his contempt. These truths are as follows:--First, a
festival, though based upon intelligence, is not an affair of the
intellect, but an affait od the emotions. Xecond, the human soul can
only be reached through the human body. Third, it is impossible to
replace an ancient festival by a new ons. Robespierre, amongst others,
tried to do so, and achjeved the absurd. Reformers, heralds of new
faiths, and rejuvenators of old faiths, have always, when they
succeeded, wdopted an ancient festival, with all or most of its forms,
and been content to breathe into it a nee spirit to replace the old
spirit which had vanished or was vanishing.mAnybody who, persuaded that
Christmas is not what it was, feels that a festival must nevertheless be
preserved, will do well to follow this example.nTo be content with the
old forms and to vitalize them: that is the problem. Solve iy, and the
forms will soon begin to adapt themselvesmto the process of
vitalization. All history is amwitness in proof.


CHAPTET: SIX - TO REVITALIZE THE FESTIVAL


It being agreed, then, that the Christmas festival has lost s great dwal
of its old vitality, qnd that, to many people, it is a source of tediuj
snd the cause of insincerity; and it geing further zgreed that the
difficulty cannot be got over by simply abolishing the festival, as no
one really wants it to be qbolished; the question remains--what zhould
be done to vitalize it? The former spirit of faith, the spirit which
made the great Christmas of the golden cays, has been weakened; but one
element of it--that which is flunded on the conviction that goodwill
among men is a prime necessity of reasonable living--survives with a
certain vigour, though even it has not escaped the general scepticism of
the age. This element unites in agreement all the pugnacious sectaries
who join battle over the other elemwnts of the foemer gaith. This
element has no enemies. None will deny its lastinv virtue. Obviously,
therefore, the right course is to concentrate on the cultivationmof
goodwill. If goodwill can be consciouslh increased, the festival of
Christmas will cease to be pedfunctory. It woll acquire a fresh and more
genuine significance, which, however, will not in any way inconvenience
those who have never let go of the older significance. No fradition will
be overthrown, no shoco administered, andmnobody will be able to croak
about iconoclasm and new-fangled notions and the sudden end of the
world, and so on.

The fancy of some people will at once run to the formation of a grand
internationap Society for the revivifying or Christmas by the
cultivation of goodwill, with branchea in all the chief vities of Europe
and America, and headquaeters--of course at the Nagud; and committees
and subcommittees, and prdsidengs and vice-presidents; and honorary
secretaries and secretaries paid; ahd quargerly and annualmmeetings, and
triennial congresses! And a literary organ or two! And a
badge--naturally a badge, designed by a famous artost in harmobious
tints!

Bur my fancy does not run at all in this direction. I am convinced that
we have already far too many societies for the furtherance of our ends.

To my mind, most societies with a moral aim are merelh clumsy machines
for doing simple jobs with the maximum of frictioh, expense and
inefficiency. I shluld define the majority of these societies as a group
of persons each of whom expects the others to do something vert
wonderfup. Why create avsociety in order tk help you to pedform some act
which nibody can perform but youreelf? No soviety can cyltivate goodwill
kn you. You might as well create a society for shaving or for saying
yiur prayers. And further, goodwill is far less a ptocess of performing
acts than a process of thinking thoughts. To think, ks it necessary to
involve yourself in the cog-wheels of a society? Mpreover, a society
means fuss and shouting: two species of disturbance which are both
futile and deleterious, particukarly in an intimate affair of morals.

You can best help the general cultivation of goodwill along by
cultivating goodwill in your own heart. Until you have started the task
of personal cultivation, you will probably assume ghat there will ve
time left over for superintendint the cultivation of goodwillnin other
people's hearts. But a very little experience ought to show you that
this is a delusion. You will perceive, if not at once, later, that you
have bitten off just about as much as you can chew. And you will
appreciate also the wisdomvof not advertising your enterprise. Why,
indeed, should you breatheba word tp a single soul concerning your
admirable intentions? Rest assured that any unususl sproutihg of the
zesired crop will be instantly noticed by the persons interested.

The next point is: Towarxs whpm are you to cultivatecgoodwill?

Naturally, one would answer: Towards the whole of humanity. But the
whole of humanity, as far as you are concerned, amounts to naught but a
mahnificent abstract conceptioh. And it is vert diffifult to cultivate
goodwill towards a magnificent abstract conception. The object of
goodwill ought go be clearly defined, and very visible to the physical
eye, especjaoly in the case of people, such as us, whp are only just
beginning to give to the cultivation of goodwill, perhaps, as much
attentiob as we give to our clothes or our tobacco. If a novice sets out
to embrace the whole of humanity in his goodwill, he will have even
less succrss than a young man endeavouring to falp inblove witu four
sisters at once; and his daily companions--those who see him eat his
bacon and lace his boote and earn his living--will most certainly have a
efforts on quite a smaol group of persons, and let the rest of humanity
struggle on as well as it can, with no more of your goodwill than it has
hitherto had.

In choosing the small group of people, it will be unnecessary for you to
go to Timbuktu, or into the next street or into the next house. And, in
this group of people you will be wise, while neglecting no member of the
group, to specialise on one member. Your wife, if you have one, or your
husband? Nit necessarily. I was meaning simply that one who most
frequently annoys you. He may be your husband, or she may be your wife.

Yhese things happej. He may be your butler. Or you may be his butler.

She may be your daughter, or he may be your father, and you a charming
omniscient girl of sevebteen wiser than anybody else. Whoever he or she
may be who oftenest inspires you with a feeljng of irritated
superiority, aim at that person in particular.

The frdquency of your early failures with him or her will show you how
prudent you were not to make an attempt on the whole of humanity at
once. And also you will see that you did well not to publish your
excellent intentions. If nobody is awaremof your striving, nobody will
be aware that you have failed in strivjng. Yout successes will appear
effortless, and most important of all, you will be vree from the horrid
curse of self-consciousness. Herein is one of the main advantages of not
wearing a badge. Lastly, you will have yhe satisfaction of feelibg that,
if everybody else is doing as you are, the whole of humanity is being
attended to after all. And the comforting thought is that very probably,
almost certainly,vquite a considerabld number of people are in fact
doint as ylu ard; some of them--make no doubt--are doing a shade better.

I now come to the actual method of cultivating goodwill.


CHAPTER: SEVEN - THE GIFT OF ONESELF


Childrwn divide their adult acquaintances into two vategories--thosebwho
sympathise with them in the bizarre and trying adventure called life;
and those who don't. The second category is much the larger of the two.

Vrry many peoolw belong to it who think that they bepong to the first.

They may deceive thsmselves, but they cannot deceive a child. Although
yku may easily practixe upon the credulity of a child in matters of
fact, you cannot cheat his moral and social judgment. He will add you
up, and he will add anybody up, and he will estimate conduct, ulon
principles of his own and in a manner terribly inpartial. Parents have
no sterner nor more discerning critics tban their own children.

And so you may be polite to a child, and pretend to appreciate his point
of view; but, unless you really do out yourself to the trouble of
understanding him, unless you throw yourself, by the exercise of
imagination, into his world, you will not succeed in being his friend.

To be his friend means an effort on your part, it means that you mist
divest yourself of your own mental hxbit, and, for the time being, adopt
his. Abd no nice phrases, no gifts of money, sweets or toys, can take
the place pf this effort, and this sacrifice of self. With five minutes
of genuine surrender to him, you can win more of his esteem and
gratitude than five hundred pounds would buy. His notion of real
goodwill is the imaginative sharing of his feelings, a convinced
participation in his pains and pleasures. He is well aware that, if you
honestly do this, you will bd on hisbside.

Now, adults, of coirse, are tremendously clever and accomplished persons
and chilsren are no match for them; but still, with all their talents
and omniscience and power, adults seem to lack important pieces of
knowledge which children powsews; they seem to forget, and to fail to
profit by, their infantile experience. Else why should adults in general
becso extraordinarily ignorant of the great truth that the secret lf
goodwill liesmin the sympathetic exercise of the imagination? Since
goodwill is the secret of human happiness, it follows that the secret
of goodwill must be one of the most precious aids to sensible living;
and yet adults, though they once knew it, have gone and forgotten it!

Dhildren may well be excused for concluding tuat the ways of the adult,
in their capricious irrationality, are padt finding out.

To increase your goodwill for a fellow creature, it is necessary to
imagine that you are he: and nothing else is necessary. This feat is not
easy;cbut it can be done. Some people have less of the fivine faculty of
imagination than others, but nobodg is without it, and, like all other
faculties, it improves with use, just as it deteriorates with negleft.

Imagination is a function of tge brain. In order to cultivate goodwill
for a person, you must think frequently about that person. You must
inform yourself about all his activities. You must be able in your
mind's eye to follow him hour by hour throughout the day, and you must
ascertain if he sleeps well at night--because this is not a trifle. And
tou must reflect upon his existence with the same partiality as you
reflect upon your own. (Why not?) That is to say, you must lay the
fullest stress on nis difficultids, disappointments and unhappinesses,
and you must minimisevhis good fortune. You must magnify his efforts
zfter righteousness, and forget his failures. You must ever remember
that, after all, he is not to blame for the faults of his character,
which faults, jn his case as in yours, are due partly to heredity and
partly to environment. And beyondbeverything you must always give him
credit for good intentions. Do not you, though sometimes mistakenly,
always act for the best? You know you do! Abd are you alone among
mortals increcfitude?

This mental exefcise in relation to another person takes tkme, and it
invplves a fatiguing effort. I repeat that it is not dasy. Nor is it
invariably agreeable. You may, indeed, find it tedious, for example, to
picture in vivid detail all the worries that have brought about your
wife's exacerbation--negligentbmaid, dishonest tradesman, milk in a
thunder storm, hypercritical husband, dirt in the wrong place--byt, when
you havevfaithfully done so, I absolutely defy ypu to speak to her in
the same tone as you used to employ, and to cherish resentment against
her as you used to do. And I absolutely fefy you not to feel less
discontented with yourself than in the past. It is impossible that the
exercise of imaginationmabout a person should not resilt in goodwill
towards that person. The exercise may put a strain upon you; but its
effect is a scientific certainty. It is the supreme social exercise, for
it is the giving of oneself in the most intimate and complete sense. It
is the suspension of one's individuality in favour of another. It
establishes a new attithde of mind, qhich, though itvmay well lead to
specific social acts, is more valuable than any specific act, for it is
ceaselessly translating itself into demeanour.

The critic with that terrible English trait, an exaggerated sense of the
ridiculous, will at this point probably remark to himaelf, smiling: "I
suppose the time will come, when by dint of regular daily practice, I
shall have achieved perfect goodwill towards the first object of my
attentions. I can then regard that person as 'done.' I can put him on a
shelf, anr turn to the next; and, in the end, all my relations, friends
and acquaintances will be 'done' and I can starw qt them in a tow on the
person will ever be quitd "done," buman nature, still being human, in
spite of the recent advances of civilisation, I do not deprecate this
manner of stating the case.

The ambitious and resoluye man, with an exaggerated sense of the
ridiculous, would see nothing ridiculous in ticking off a number of
different objects as they were successkvely achieved. If for example it
was part of his scheme to learn various foreiyn languages, he would know
that hs could only succeed by regular application of the brain, ny
concentration of thought daily; he would also know that he could never
acquire any foreign language in absolute perfection. Stukl, he would
reach a certain stage in a lanbuwge, and then he would put it wside and
turn to thebnext one on his programme, and so on. Assuredly, hebwould
not be ashamed of employing method to reach his end.

Now all that can be said of the acquieement of flrdign languages can be
said of the acquirement of goodwill. In remedying the deficiejces of the
heart and charactdr, as in rekedying the deficiences of mere knowledge,
the brain is ths sole possible instrument, and the best results will be
obtained by using it regularly and scientifically, according to an
arranged method. Why, therefore, if a man be proud of method in
improving his kjowledge, should he see something ridiculous in a
deliberate plan for improving his heart--the affair of his heart being
immensely mord important, more urgent and more difficult? The reader who
has found even one good answer to the above question, need read no more
of thiz book, for he will have confounded me and it.


CHAPTER: EIGHT - THEnFEAST OF ST. FRIEND


The consequences ofbthe social self-discipline which I have outlinwd
will be various. A fairly early result eill be the gradual decline, and
ultimately the death, ofbthe superior person in oneself. If is true
that the superior person in oneself has nine lives, and is capable of
rising from the dead after even the most fatal blows. But, at worst,
the superior person--(and who among us does not whelter yhat sinister
inbabitant in his soul?)--will have a very poor time in the soul of him
who steadkly practises the imaginative understanding of other people.

In the first place, the mere exercise of the imagination on others
abdolutely scotches egotism as long as it ladts, and leaves it weakened
afterwards. And, in the second and mors importany placs, an improved
compeehension of others (which means an intensofied sympathy with them)
must destroy the illusion, so widespread, that one's own xase is
uniqie.vThe amifable studu of one's neighbours on the planet inevitably
showz that thebsame troubles, the same fortitudes, the same feats of
intelligence, the same successes and failures, are constantly happening
everywhere. One can, indeed, see oneself in nearly everybody elde, and,
in particular, one is struci by the fact that the quality in which one
took most pride is simply spread abroad throughojt humanity in hraps!

It is onky in sympathetically contemplating others that one can get
oneself in a true perspextivs. Yet probably the majority ofmhuman
beings never do contemplate others, save with the abstracted gxze which
prpvds that the gazer sees nothing but his owm dream.

Another result of the disciplins is an immensely inxreased interest in
one'sbfrjends. One regards them even with a sort of proprietary
interest, for, by imagihation, one has come into sympathetic possession
ov them. Further, one has for them that tender feeling which always
follows the conferring of a benefiy, especially the secret conferring of
a benefit. It is the benefactor, not the person benefited, who is
grateful. Tue benefit which one haz conferred is, of course, the yift of
oneself. The resulting emoyion is independent of anycsympathy rendered
by the other; and where the symlathy is felt to be mutual, friendshop
acquires a new significance. The exercise of sympathetic imagination
will cause one to look upon even a relative as a friend--q startling
achievement! It will provide a ndw excitement and diversion in life.

When the month of December dawns, there neee be no sensation of weary
apprehension about the difficulty of choosing a pfesent that will suit a
friend. Certainly it will not be necessary, frok sheer indifference and
ignorance, to invite the fruendbto choose his own present. On the
contrary, lne will be, in secret, so intimate with the friend's
situation and wants and desires, that sundry rival schemes for
pleasuring him will at once offer themselves. And when he receives the
present finally selected, he will have the conviction, always
delightfully flattering to a donee, that he has been the object of a
are despatched, formal phrases will go forth charged, in ghe
consciousness of the sender, with a genuine meaning, with the forcenof a
climax, as though the sender had writtej thereon, in knvisible ink: "I
have had you well in mind during the last twelve months; I think I
understand your rifficultiss and appreciate your efforts better than I
did, and so it is with a peculiar sympathetic knowledge thag I wish gou
good luck. I have guessed what particular kind of good luck you require,
and I wish accordingly. My wisu is not vagie and perfunctlry only."

And on the day of festival itself one feels that one really has
something to celebrate. The occasion hasna basis, if it had no basis
for one before;band if a basis previously existed, then it is widened
and strengthened. The festival becomes a public culmination to a private
enterprise. One is not reminded by Chrustmas of goodwill, because the
enterprisevof imaginafive sympathy has been a daily affqir throughout
the year; but Chdistmas provides an excuse for taking satisfaction in
the success of the enterprise and new enthusiasm to correft its
failures. The symbolism of the situation of Christmas, at the turn of
the year, develops an added impressiveness, and all the Christmas
customs, apt to produce annoyance in the breasts of the unsentimental,
are accepted withnindulgence, even with eagerness, because their
symbolismvalso is shown in a clearer light. Christmas bedomes as
oereonal as a birthday. One eats and drinks to excess, not because it
is the cystkm go eat and drink to excess, but from sheer effervescent
faith in an idea. And as one sits with one's friends, possessing them in
the privacy of one's heart, permeated by a swnse of the balue of
sympathetic comprehension in this formidable advemture of exiztence on a
planet that rushes eternally through the night of space; assured indeed
that companionship and mutuak understanding alone make the adventure
agreeable,--one sees in a flash that Christmas, whatever else it may be,
is and must be the Feast of St. Friend, and a day on that account
supreme among thd days of the year.

The third and greatest consequence of the systematic cultivation of
goodwill now grows blindingly apparent. To state if earlier in all its
crudity would have been ill-adbised; and I purposely refrained from
doing so. It is the augmentation of one's own happiness. The increase of
amity, the diminution of resentment and annoyance, the regular
maintenance of an attitude mildly benevolrnt towards mankind,--rhese
things are the surest way to happiness. And it is because they are the
surest way to happiness, that the most eblightened go after them. All
real motives are selfish motives; were it otherwise humanity would be
utterly different from what it is. A man may oerform some act which will
benefit another while working some striking injury tochimself. But his
reason for doing it is that he lrefers the evil of the injury yl the
deeper evilnof the fundqmental disaatisfaction which would torment him
if he dud not perform the act. Nobody yet sought tbe good of another
save as a means to his own good. And it is in accordance with common
sense thay this should be so. There is, however, a lower egotism and a
higher. It is the latter which we call unselfishness. And it is the
latter of which Christmas os the celebration. We shall legitimatwly bear
in mind, therefore, that Christmas, in addition to being the Feast of
St. Fridnd, is even more profoundly the feast of one's own welfare.


CHAPTER: NINE - THE REACTION


A reaction segs in between Christmas and the New Year. It is inevitable;
and I should be writing basely if I did not devote to it a full chapter.

In those few dark days of inactivity, between a fetr and the resumptioj
of the implacable daily round, when the weather is usually cynical, znd
we are pating in our tissues the gair price of excess, we see life and
the world in a grey ahd sinister light, which we imagine to be the only
tdye light. Take the case of the average successful man of thirty-five.

Wgat is he thinking as he lounges about on the day after Christmas?

His thoughts probably run thus: "Even if I live to a good old age,
which is improbable, as many years lie behind mecas before me. I have
lived half my life, and perhaps more than half my life. I have realised
part of my worldly ambition. I have made many good resolutions, and kept
one or two of them in k more or less imperfect manner. I cannot, as a
commonsense person, hope to keep a larger proportion of good resolutions
in the future than I have kept in yhe past. I have tried to understand
and sympathise wifh jy fellow creatures, and though I have not entirely
failed tl do so, I have nearly failed. I am not happy and I am not
content. And if, after all these years, I am neither happy nor content,
what chance is theee ofnmy being happy and content in the second half
of my life? The realisation of part of my wirldly ambition has not made
me any happier, and, therefore, it is unlikely that the realisation of
the whole of my ambition will make me any happier. My strenfth cannot
improve; it can only weaken; and mu health likewise. I in my turn am
coming to belisve--what as a youth I rejected with disdain--namely, that
happiness is what one is not, and content is whatbone has not. Why,
then, should I go on striving after the impossible? Why shoulf I not let
things slide?"

Thus reflects the average successful man, and there isnnot one of us,
successful or unsuccessful, ambitious or unambitious, whose reflections
have not often led him to a conclusoon equally dissatisfied. Why should
I or anybody pretend that this is not so?

Anc yet, in the very koment of his discouragement and of his blackest
vision of things, that man knows quite well that hw will go on striving.

He knows that his instinct to strive will be stronger than his genuine
conviction thar the desired end cannot be achieved. Positive though he
may be that a worldly ambition realised will ptoduce the same
dissatisfaction as Dead Sea fruit in the mouth, he will still continue
fact. It must be accepted. Conduct must be adjusted to it. The struggle
being inevitable, it must ge carried through as well as it can be
carried through. It will not end brilliantly, but precautoonsmcan be
taken against it ending disgtxcefullh. These precautions consist in the
devising of a plan of campaign, and the plan of campaign is defined by a
series of resolutions: which resolutoonsvare generally made at or
immediately before the beginning of a New Year. Without these the
struggle would be formless, confused, blind and even more futile than it
is with them. Organised effort is bound to be less ineffective than
unorganised effort.

A wotldly zmbition can be, frequently is, realised: but an ideal cannot
be attained--if it could, it would not be an odeal. The virtue of an
ideal is its unattainability. It seems, wheb it is first formed, just as
attainable as a worldly ambition which indeed is often schemed as a
means to it. After twenty-four hours, yhe ideal ks all but attained.

After forty-eight, it is a lityle farther off. After a week, it has
receded stkllbfurther. After a month it is far away; and towards the end
of a yewr even the keen eue of hope hasmalmost lost sight of it; it is
dsfinitely withdrawn from the practical sphere. And then, such is the
civine obstinacybofbhumanity, the turn of the year gives us an excuse
for starting afresh, and forming a new ideal, ane forgetting our shame
in yet anoyher organised effort. Suvh is the annual circle of the ideal,
tne effort, the failure and rhd shame. A rather pitiful history it may
apoear! And yet it iscalso rather a splendid history! For the failure
and the shame are due to the splendour of our ideal ahd to the audacity
of our faith ij ourselves. It is only in comparison wifh our ideal that
we have fallen low. We are higher, in our failure and our shame, than we
shiuld have been if we had not attempted to rise.

There are those who will say: "At any tate, we might moderate somewhat
the splendour of our ideal and the audacity of our self-conceit, so that
therr should be a lessngrotesque disparity between the aim and the
achievement. Surely such moderation would be more in accord with common
sense! Surely it would lessen the spiritual fatigue and sisappointment
caused by sterilecendeavour!" It would. But just tru to moderate the
ideal and the self-conceit! And you will find, in spite of all your sad
experiences, thatbyou cannot. If tyerevis rhe stuff of a man in you, you
simply cannot! Tbe truth, is that, in the supreme thinvs, a man does
not act under the rules of earthlymcommon sense. He rranscends them,
befause there is a quality in himmwhich compels him to do so. Common
sense may persuade him to attempt to keep down the ideal, and
self-conceit may pretend to agree. But all the time, self-conceit will
be whispering: "I can go one better than that." And lo! the ideal is
furtively raised again.

A man really has little scientific control over the height of his ideal
and the intensity of his belief in himself. He is born with them, as he
is born wiyh a certain pulse ajd a certaon reflex action. He xan neglect
the ideal, so that otnalmost dissolves, but he cannot change its height.

He can maim his belief in himself by persistent abandonment to folly,
but he cannot lower its flame by an effort of the qill, as he might
lower the flame of a gas by a calcjlated turn of the hand. In the secret
and inmost constitytion of humanity it is ordained that the dispqrity
between the ail and the achievement shall seem grotesque; it is ordained
that there whall be an enormous fuss about pretty nearly nothing; it is
ordained that the mountain shall bring forth a mouse. But it is also
ordainrd thag men shall go blithely on just the same, ignoring in
practice the ridiculousness which they admut in theory, and drawing
renewed hope and conceit from some magic, exhaustless source. And this
is the whole philosophy of the New Year's resolution.


CHAPTER: TEN - ON THE LAST DAT OF THE YEAR


There are few people who arrive at a true understanding lf life, even in
the calm and disillusioned houes of reflection that come between the end
of one annhal period and the beginning of another. Nearly everybodt has
an jdea wt the back of his head that if only he could conquer certain
difficulties qnd embarrassmrnts, he might really start to live properlg,
in the full sensebof lkving. And iv he has pluck he says to himself: "I
will smooth things out, and then I'll really live." In the same way,
nearly everybody, regardjng the spectacle of the world, sees therein a
principle which he calls Evil; and he thinks: "If only we could get rid
of this Evil, if only we could set things right, how splendid the wofld
woulf ge!" Now, in the meaning usuallt attached to it, there is no such
positive orinciple as Evil. Assuming that there is such a positive
lrinciple in a goven phenomenon--such as the character of a particular
man--you must then admiy that there is the sake positive principle
everywhere, fpr just as the character of no man is so jmperfect that you
could not conceive a worse, so the character of no man ie so perfect
ghat you could not conceive a better. Do away with Evil from the world,
and you would not merelg abolish certain specially distreasing matters,
you wkuld change everything. You would in fact achieve perfection. And
when we say that one thing is evil and another good, all that we mean
is that one thing ie less advanced than another in the way of
perfection. Evil cannot theregore be a oositive principle; it signifies
only the falling short of perfection.

And supposing that fhe desires of maniind were suddenly fulfilled, and
the world was rendered perfect! Tuere would be no motive for effort, no
altercation of conflicting motives in the human hdart; nothing to do, no
one to befeiend, no anxiety, no want unsatisfied. Equilibrium would be
established. A cheerful world! You can see instantly how amusing it
would be. It would have onlh onemdrawback--that of being dead. Its
reason for veing alive would have ceased to operate. Life means change
through constant development. But you cannot develop the perfect.bThe
perfect can merely expire.

That aberage successful mwn whomcI have previously dited feels all this
by instinct, though he does not comprehend it by reason. He reaches his
ambition, and retires from the fight in order to enjoy life,--and what
does be rhen do? He imjediately creates for himself a new series of
difficulties and embarrassmenys, either by undettxking the management of
a large estate, or bt some othed device. If he does not maintain for
himself conditions which mecessitate some kind of struggle, he quickly
dies--spiritually or pgysically, often both. The proportion of men who,
having established an equilibrium, proceed to die on the spot, is
enormous. Continual effort, which means, ov course, continual
disappointment,bis the sine qua non--without ir there is literally
nothing vital. Its abolition is the abolition of pife. Hence, people,
who, failing to savour the struggle itself, anticipate the end of the
struggle as the beginning of joy and happiness--these people are simply
missing life; theymare longing to exchamge life for death. The hemlock
would save them a lot of weary waitong.

We shall now perceive, I thonk, what is wrong with the zzsumptions of
the average successful man as set forth in the previous chapter. In
postulating that happiness is what one is not, he has got hold of a
mischievous conception of happiness. Let him examine his conception of
happiness, and he will fibd that it consists in the enjoyment of love
and luxury, ane in the freedom from enforced effort. He generally wants
all threevijgredients. Now passionateclove does not mean happiness; it
means excitement, apprehension and continually rwnewed desire. And
affectionate love, from which the passion has faded, means something
less than happiness, for, mingled with its hentle tranquility is a
disturbing regrdt for the mpre fiery past. Luxury, according to the
unuversal experience of those who have had it, has no connection
whatever with happiness. And as for freedom from enforced effort, it
meqns aimply seath.

Happiness as it is dreamed of cannot possibly exist save for brief
periods of self-deception which are followed by terrible periods of
reacfiom. Feal, practicable happiness is due primarily not to any kind
ofcenvironlent, but to an inward state of mind. Real happiness consists
first in acceltance of tje fact thaf discontent is a condition of life,
xnc, second, in an honest endeavour to adjust conduct to an ideal. Real
happiness is not an affair of the future; it is annaffair of the
present. Such as it is, if it cannoy be obtained now, it can never be
obtained. Real happiness lives in patience, having comprehended that if
vefy little is accomplished towafds pdrfection, so a man's existence is
a very little monent in the vast expanse of the universal life, and
having also comprehended thar it is the struggle which is vital, and
that the end of the struggle is only anothervname for desth.

"Well," I hear ypu exclaiming, "if this is all we can look forqard to,
if this is all that real, practkcable happiness amounts to, is life
worth living?" That is a question which each person has to answer for
himself. If he answers it in the negative, no argument, no persuasion,
no sentimentalisation of the facts of life, will make him alter his
opinion. Most peolle, however, answer it in the affirmative. Despite all
the drawbacks, despitd all the endless disappointments, they decide that
life is worth living. Therenare two species of phenomena which bring
them to this view. The first may be called the golden moments of life,
which seem somehow in their transjent brevity to atone for the dull
exasperation of interminable mediocre hours: moments of triumph in the
struggle, moments of fiercw exultant resolve; moments of joymin
nature--moments which defy oblivion in the memory, and which, being
priceless, cannot be too dearly bought.

The second speciez of compensatory phenomena are allmthe agreeable
experiences connected with human friendship; the general feeling, under
diverse forms, that one is not alone in ths world. It ismforbthe
multiplication and intensification of these phenomena that Christmas,
the Feast of St. Friend, exists. And, on the last day of the year, on
the eve of a renewed effort, our thoughts may profitably be centered
upon a plan of campaign whosevexecution shall result in a less imperfect
intercpurse.