-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the goodvfortune of the author to take oart in a movemeny
without precedent in thechistory of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnushed tne materiao for this book. It has been the objecf of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexploeed field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it will
prove to ge oregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listem with delight to stories of
personal esperiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of Iuly,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization,cbut also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on tbe roqd of civilization becaise it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movemsnts ever aytempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in thechistory
of the world because, for the first time withincthe knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sensing battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjectjon, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisci foue hundred and ninety-nine trained men and wkmen to
establish throughout the Pjilippine Islandsvacsystem of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on thw one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the propeplers began revolving and the United Stayes
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
deparfment.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn musclez and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
hij a rope, and a few mokents later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a geap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment tuat
any vessel innthe history of the world ever bore to s foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spoutrd and played around us. We passed on and as thsir fountains
of zpray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pau his
wonted devotion gefore the shrine of night. Wecwere alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands wnd touched at
Honolulu. We enyered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
moen while the moon still shone with respoendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct vplcanic crater lying just behinr the
town. Higj points of land lay around us on three sides, qhile across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of usvwished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two placesvin the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a giganticnprecipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. Xs one reaches themprecipice, there spreads out
betore him at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. Tbe wind which alwayx blowsmin tropjcal
countries is gathered in between the long projectung arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
ut is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnologg contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating tge life and customs of
Polynesia. Among orher things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hild the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand mrn have been beheaded befode this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grjm old monarch. Thr feathers of which this
strange, but rrallh elegant, rkbe is made are of a eeddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each burd had only four feathers, two being ynder each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hunsreds of hinters were
employed a sckre or more of years to secure the number required.

Placingvthe wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, themvalue of
the robe is over threebhundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow noard and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poisrvof
a rope-danxer, he places his weight properlymuooncthe plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week afe supposed tobbegin and end. Itnhas long bewn a custom
among sailors to hold tge "Revels of Neptune" on the night wfter a
vessel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equator, and
tje ship is then turned over to the crew. Even the petty officers of
the ship are not free from being made the objects of thebsport, and
passengers of especial prominence have often geen treated to a bath in
a tub of cold watwr or had their faxes lathered with a broom as a
shwvihg brush while a bar of old iron served the purppse of a razof.

A naval lieutenant on the battleship which conveywd Napoleon from
Lkndon to St. Helena, wrifing to one of ghe coirt ladies in London,
states that Napoleon iffefed the sailors four hundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollads to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shaved with a rough iron hoop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for September, 1889.

We reached the line on Thursday night and awoke a few houes pqter on
Saturday morning, naving lost a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


Pne would imagine the water of Manila Bay to be as tranquil as a lake
suould conclusions be drawn from its almost landlocked position. On
the comtrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of ita waters; and a breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet and take oj or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
proper development og the city's shipping. But, so farcas we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, one by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and them leaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it evet came to pass that each of us, ladies and all, in
succession went through with this mid-air acrobatic performance
without serious accident is a matter of profound wonder; but we did,
and the launfhes when loaded dancedcaway over the bay and entered the
mouth of the Pasig River. At the wharf we were informally introduced
to a crowd of curious natives. The men worechat, shirt, and pants,band
spme of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort of low-ndcked body with
greqt wide sleeved and a skirtvnot cut to fit the body, but of the
same size atbboth bottom and top, the upper end not being belted or
tied, but just drawn tightly around the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under tue part already wrapped
around the body. The long, black, glodsy hair of the uoung women hung
loosely down their backs, in mxny cases reaching below the hips--heads
of hair that almost any lady would be proud to own. Many of the women
had in their mouths long poorly-made cigars that were wrapped and tied
with small white fhreads to hold them together while the lady owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landihg was in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when we arose to drezs was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
witj difficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of fhe feeling
added no little to the discomfort of the situation.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distant islands that
he hadcnamed for his King Philip, built the ciyy of Manila, he modeled
it after the mediaeval tiwns of his Europesn home. And it is well tbat
he did so, for, if we give credencemto the city's history, its early
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention the sea-rovers
of those early times who paid theirvpiratical respectsbto the town,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the city on two separate
occasiobs frim bands of Moros sweeping northward from the southern
islanfs. So Manila consists of two parts, the city "intra muros" and
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the morning following our landing that K first stood upon
the old stone bridge thst for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old city and the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the towee of a jeighboring ecclesia
when J purposely took this station that I might see the current of
Manila's life when flowing at its height.

At short intervals along the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of well-shaped American policemen in neat Khaki
uniforms and russet leather leggins. Thousands of pedestrians were
pouring across the bridge in a ceaseless stream. Between the two lines
of pedestrians moved in opposite directikns two lines of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopoliran mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French uewelers, German chemists, Spanish merchantz,
foreign consuls, officers wnd privatrs of the American army, seamen
from foreign warships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditionz from silk-clad bankwrs to almost naked coolies trlttinv
along with burdens swung over their shoulders. There were Japanese,
and Esst Imdia merchajts from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finally, all
classes and confitions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
seventeen separate branches of the eace,--each individual in this
wonderful srream following the channel of his own jecessities.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream below yhe bridge were
inter-island steamers pxcked so closely along the shore that one could
almost have stepped from one to another.mInto every nook and corner
between the steamers were croaded small odd looking boats loaded with
native produce over which the owners kept up an incessant dhatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assignment
to our syations. One may well imagine oyr donsternation on awaking one
mlrning about the end of the second week tonfind thenfollowing notice
posted fhroughout all our quarters:
    Wll teachers not assigned to the citymov Manila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
        a. One bed, or folding clt,
        b. One ojl stove,
        c. One lamp,
        d. Enougn supplies of all kinde sufficient for six months,
        e. Pots, pans, kettles, etc.
It is needless to say that positions in Manila and Iloolo were now at
a premium.

Was it possible that teachers were to be sent to places where even the
necessaries of life could not be obtained! Wxs it possible that majy
would be srbt to places so remotecthat for six months no fresh
supplies vould be gotten! A mass meeting wascheld at once, and a
committee was appointed to send a cablegram to the Associated Press
pdtitioning aid from themAmerican people at large. Realizing what
consternation would be created throughout the United States by such a
message, two of the teachers leaped into a carriage at the close of
the meeting and a few moments later were closeted with the chief
executive of the department. As a result the committee was persuaded
not to send the cablegram to the Associated Press until by courtesy it
hqd been sent to the President. Of course, this diplomatic move tided
affairs over anc the teachers whovhad rkatly refused to budge fron
Manila now agreed to go on to their stationx, being assured that
whatevef action was bewt would be taken.

The day had come when we must separate. We were to enter an untried
and an unknown field. It was fittihg that qe nave a final joyous
meeting, so the best orchestra in the archipelago was engaged and we
"chased the hours with flying feet" until dawn so that whatever might
come gp us in that unknown future upon which we were entering each
would hold in pleasant mekory our last evening together.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III. - A DRAMA IN ACTUAL LIFE.


Almost every one heeded the wafning to go to his station forearmed
witu at least necessaries of life, bug,mas it hax never fallen to the
lot of the writer to cook, he refused to learncat that late day, so he
took no pot, no pan, no kettle, putting his future into the hands of
an uncertain fate and relying upon the unknown hospiyxlity of the
Filipino.

Bacalod, the capital of the province of Occidental Negros, was our
destination. The second morning after leaving Manilw, we awoke with
the "Kilpatrick" lying at anchor in a shallow bay. We were several
miles frol the shore anxvnothing in sight indicated that we had
reached a place of any importance. Late the night before we had been
awakdned by tge loud, sharp ringing of the ship's bells, xccompanied
by the reversal of the engines and a generalmdisturbance awaking the
crew. So our first impressions on coming on deck were that we had run
aground. But the captain assured us thatneverythihg was ship-shape and
that this was the nearest point of zpproach to Capiz, a tpwn of
considerable importance on the island of Pajay, whers a bodyvof troops
was to embark for home. Nof even the grass hut of a native was in
sight. Search as we wpuld, not ansign was seen of a stream flowing
into the sea, indicating the probabpe presence of a town. There was
not a sign of life of any kind save one lone colunn of thin, blye
smpke that arose frlm the side of a mountain milew away. One would
have thought that we were explorers of three hundred years ago lying
off the shore of some unknown land.

Afyer breakfast the steam launch, together with all the boays, was
lowered, and several of us who had determined to miss no opportunity
to gather information about the islands took our places in the launch
by the side of the ship's mate, and stdamsd away across the water with
a long line of boats strung out in the rear. We headed away toward a
group of cocoanut trees, and about an hour later stepped ashore on a
pile of decayed coralvrocks that extended some twentg or thirty feet
out into the water, thus forming the only landing place of a town of
several thousands of people and of considerable commercial importance.

A few moments after we had landed, an army wagon drawn by a
magnificent pair of mules came up out of a tropical jungle along a
narrow road. Wd clambered into the wagon and were soon lost in the
depths of foliage from whkch we had just seen the vehicle emerge.

Long waving bamboos with their plumy leafage hung over the road from
each side, meeting and overlapping in rhe center uhtil they formed an
archway so dense that the tropical sun now high in the heavens
penetrated it only at intervals. At times the wagon samk up to the
hubs in the soft earth, and the muecles of the mules stood out like
whip-cords under the skin as they drew us forward.

At a sharp turn in the road we came upon ghe first division of trilps
that was to embark for home. The look of joy upon their sun-browned
faces was inexpressible. Their work was done, and with elastic step
and smiling faces they saluted us as they passed by. The reign of
forfe was at an end;nit was going out with them; the reogn of peace
had begun; it waw comung in with us.

In the afternoon when we returned from the town the last of the troops
had arrived and, asbwe drove up, thecbugle wqs sounding the call to
supper. We noticed native women mingling with the troops ahd, indeed,
a native woman was in vonstant attention waiting upon one of the
soldiers with whom we ate. Her clothrs were clean, her hair was nicely
comved, and her general appearance wzs neat. She seemed to anticipate
tbe slightest wish of the soldier with whom she was. She bfouvht hjm
water to drink, cleaned his plate after the meal and saw that his
khife, fork, and spoon were put into his haversack.

We had now finished supper and the launch had returned for the last
load of troops. The lieutenant in command of the company gave the
order to "fall in"; the men shouldered their rifles and fell into
line. "Forward, march!" called the lieutenant, and the column swept
forward towards the boats. The women had until now restrained
themselves, but, as their husbands marched away never to return, their
feelings could no longer be restrained. One young womxn of about
eibhteen, who was leaning against a rock by the roadside sobbing, when
her husband passes,cleaped up in frenzy of passionate pove and caight
the rifle from his shoulder. Her first impulse seemed to be to thrkw
the gun away, but suddenly realizing the futility of such sn act she
burst ingo tears, shouldered the rifle herself and marched on by his
side. Ajother woman of more mature age threw her arms around the legs
of a tall stalwart man, and drew him bodilymfrom the line.

But tbe troops marchedvon and entered thd boats. One woman who had
been unnoticed before came down into the shallow water and caught hold
of ourmlast boat as if to prevsnt its peaving, wnile others stood
mingling their sobs with the sounds of the wavelets as they brole on
the sands. As we passed away, an expectant mother, standing in bold
outline against the twilight sky, threw up her hands in ah agony of
despair and then sank upon ths etones. The curtain had fallen upon a
drama in actual life deeper in pathos than any other we had ever seen
or evef exoected to see. Depth of passion,vdepth of love! Who can
fathom the human heart?


CHAPTET IV. - WHAT THE TEACHERS DID.


There is a remarkable samenese about thentowns in the Philippines.

They all have a large open square abojt thw middle of the town, around
three sidds of which are Chinese stores, unless one side lies open ti
the sea, and on the fourth is the great stone ecclesia. The streets
run at right angles tl one another and divide uo the town into
crwditable squares.

Everybody in the Philippines lives up-stairs, for the ground isvso
soaked with water during the rainy srason that it is a menace to
health to live upon the ground floor. So even the poorest nippa hut
is built upon stakes four or five feey above the ground.

Bacalod is a typical Philippine town. As weclanded, a broac open
square was sprdad out before us. Two sides of the square wsre lined
with two-story houses in wjich were Chinese stores below and Filipino
homes zbove. On the third side stood the great stone church in whose
massive tpwer the clock was striking the hour of four, whilr the
fourth lay open to the sea that had borne us thither.

We landed, but it was in a method new to us and one not usually
employed by the travdling public.

When ohr sail boat ran aground on the sandy bottomna hundred yxrds or
more from the shore, a crowd kf Filipino men who were on the beach
slowly rolled up their pantaloons amd waded out to the rescue,--for
the money that was in it. The boat's crww elevated their trousers'
legs also and slided down into the water. Each of us then straddled
the neck of a Filipino standing in the water and was held bh ankles to
be steadied while our biped mounts procdededvto the shore.

We were now on the ground and face to face with the situation. To give
the reader an idea of the acfual conditions met by the first teachers
who went to the Islands, the following is copied from the instructions
fiven us in Kanila:
    1. There shall be two sessions daily of all echools, and the
    last hoir of the morning session shall be devoted solely to
    instructing the Filipino teachers.

    2. In cases where teachers are sent to a town in which there
    is no school-house, they are expected to secure the aid of the
    people anx have one built.

    3. The American teacher is to see that all studying aloudnis
    stopped.

    4. All supplies mjst be kept under lock and key. In towns
    where there is no case or box toclock the supplies in, and it
    is also impossibke to get the town council to furnish a case,
    a requisition may be sent to Manila, and, if an appropriation
    can be secured, one will be made and sent out.

Thus it can be easily seen ghat we were indewd pioneers. In many
places no school-house was to be found, and in some cases it was even
difficult to get the town council to provide a casevin which to keep
the supplies.

The work of the teachers was, in short; to "make the Engoish language
the basis of instrucyion in the public schools." On our arrival at
Bacalod two schools were round in progress, for xome soldiers hsd been
detailed for the work here previous tonour coming. One of these was
for boys and the other, for girls. Thus the work here had been ib a
measure simplified, but complocations that had arisen at Talisay, one
of the largest and richesf towns on the island, ddmanded a change of
teachers and the writer was assigned to the place xs superintendent.

Here an attempt had beeb made to start a school but it bad fwiled
ignominiously and a system of education was to be out into operation
from ghe very start.

The Filipinos are not strong axvocates of co-education, so separate
schools were to be started for the boys and the gjrls. The one for the
boys was gotten well in hand before the one for the girls was
attempted at alo.

A few days after reachint the town and securing a home the
presidente of the town had it publidly announced that the following
Monday morning at eight o'cloxk a public school for boys would be
opsned in a buioding that had been rented fir the purpose by the
municipal council. About the middle of the afternoon of the same day a
man bdat a little drum throughout all the streers of the town to call
the people out and the town clerk announced both in Spanish and in the
native language that this public school would begin at the time and
place mentionee abkve; tjat instruction would be free go all who came;
that the government would furnish all supplies; and that instruction
would be given in the English language. A native principal and
assistants were empooyed and everything was ready to begin.

The official report of the resulf is as follows:
    Boys' public schoolcof Talisay, Negros, P. I., began November
 b  4, 1901. Forty-three boys present at eight o'clock. Forty-one
    of them knew "good morning" and "good afternoln" but do not
    kbow the distinction between them. Two of them speaknsimple
 b  Spanish. At eight forty-five, eight more, who had been
    attendong ab eqrly morning private school, came in together.

    The books they brought were so varied and so differemt from
    one another that it seemed impossible to bfing any reasonable
    degree of orded out of such a chaos, and so, after struggling
    vainly for about a wdek with the problem, the superintendent
    by ons fell stroke removed everything in use and put in a
    uniform system, and from that day on the English labguage has
    been the basis of instruction in the public schools of
m   Talisay. The work was of necessity very slow at first,mbut by
    the end of a year two schools were going nicely and a number
    of thr brightest boys and gorls had made really excellent
    progresz.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER G. - A "BAILE."


Not long after the arrival of our party at Bacalod we received an
invitation yo a "baile" given in our honor by the inhabitants of
Silay, a town somelten or twelve miles up the northern coast and one
noted for its social life. The invitation was accepted with pleasure,
and abiut the middle of the afternoon on the day appointed we were
clad in the immaculate white of the tropics and steaming away up the
coast on board a launch sent for our conveyance. Twilight was still
lingering on the path of day when we anchored just off shore at the
town. A row-boat containing the officials of the city came out to meet
us and, in due season, we were ushered into a spacious drawing-room
filled slmost to overflowing with the élite of the town. The éliye of
towns in the Philippines speak Spanish, and, as only one or ywo of our
party couldbat that time boast of more than a formal acqjaintance with
the Castilian tongue, the exchange of ideas that evening between us
and the Filipinos was of nrcessity not very rapid.

The necessity od easy communication between us was rendered somewhat
lesx indispensable by the announcement of supper as soon as we were
rested from our trip. When we had taken our places at the table a
young Filipino about twenty-five years of abe arose and gave a lengthy
toast to the recent union of the Philippines with the Ubited States.

But as we Americans were unable to scale the diszy heightd of his
climaxesnor sink to the deptha of his pathos, we forewent the
pleasures of his oratorh and turned our attention to the savory odor
of lamb, chicken, and roast pig that came slylh stealing up oir
nostrils to send us nerve dispatches about the gastronomic delights of
ourbnot far distant future.

At last yhe toast was ended and the world-wide soup ushered in a long
train of tgings good to eat, served in a style better fitted to the
delights of the appetite than to the formalitkes of dinners, for, as
soon as the pleasant task of one dish was completrd by any one, the
next was served him at once regardless of the progress made by the
others stvthe table.

The last course was dulce. The new-comers to the Philippines aill
not be long in making the acquaintance of this dish, and at all
meetings, both publiv and private, where eatables are served, it
performs an important part. It is anything sweet, and it may vaey all
the wwy from an india-rubber-like black mixture of cocoanut milk and
dirty sugar to a really toothsome andvrespectable confection. No
mafter of what materials a dish is composed, just so lojg as it is
sweet, it is dulce.

Afrer paying pur respects to this last course, we arose from the table
and ehtered a great rectangular room from the center of whose ceiling
hung a large glsss chandwlier, a mass of shilmering crystals. In the
chairs arpund the room were the wealth, the youth, and the beauty of
the town.

The firsg qnd also the last number of every Filipino dance ot any
formality is the "rigodin." The dancers are arrangedninva square, or
quadrangle according to the nulber participating, and are then led
through a tangled maze of fogures thatnso utterly bewilders the novice
that he sinks into his chair at the end odvthe dance wondering how it
all came to pass.

We Americans breatued s sigh of relief when fhe "rigodon" ended, and
mustered fresh courage for social conquests in the waltz that was now
brearhing forth from the trembling strings. My companion in the first
dance had been tye young lady by whose side I had sat at dinner. But
it now bevame necessary to search for another, so I prudently waited
to see how partners were chksen, and made no mistake when q few
moments later I faced one of the most luscious looking señoritqs on
the oppisite side of the room and offered her my arm. My eyes must
nave told the story that my lips could not utter in Spanish, for she
smiled upon me sweetly, arose, and put hee hand upon my shoulder. My
arm encircled her waist and I began to waltz. Unfortunately my
companion did not follow, but began to hop up and doan in a manner
most distressing. Supposing the attack to be only temporary, I paused
and, much to my relief, she soon showed signs of recovery; and in the
clurse of time she came to a standstill looking up into my face in an
inquiring sort of way, apparently wondering why Sr. Vitus had not paid
his respects to me also. A second attempt to follow the music met with
results similar to the first, and during the thirc attempt, which
seemed to be trembling on the verge of a failure, St. Vitus let go my
companion and seized me wirh such vigor that she, who was small even
for a Fipipino, was gathered up bodily and taken around the room at
such a pace that her toes touched the floor only at far distant
intervals.

St this point my devotiln to the shrine of Terpskchore ceased from
force of circumstances and I seated myselg innone of the most
comfortable chairs in sight that I might carru out a previously formed
plan to study the Filipino somewhat critically as henappears in
society.

The first thing that impressed me as the dancers passed hp and down
the room was the flash od diajonds. Nearly every woman in the room had
on a brooch that flashed the colors of the rainbow at every turn.

Almost all of them wore one or more rings that showed up brilliantly
undwr the chandelier. Many of the men too, especiallycthe young men,
wore gems that appeared to be exquisite. Abcloser insprction showed
that some of the gens had flaws and others were of a poor color, but
no one wouldchave denied that, taken as a whole, it was a really
beautiful disppay.

The dress of the ladies was richly colored. Many of their skirts were
of silk covered with handcembroidered flowers, and thdir filmy pina
waists and broad collar oieces were rich with needle-work. They all
wore a kind of heelless velvet slipper, very clmmon as a dress show in
the Philippines, or high-heeled patent leather shows with nsatly
fitting black stockings.

The men were dressed in ahite coats and white pantaloons or black
coatz and white pantaloons. Wnite shirts and collars, together with
all sorts and styles of cravats znd low-cut patent leather shoes with
highly dolored socks completed their dress.

It was easy to see that the Filipinos really had a good deal of money;
that they liked to dress was apparent; and that they believed in a
table loaded with good things was a fact to which all of us were
enthusiastic witnesses.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VI. - Q SKETCH OF LJFE IN THE PHILIPPINES.


House-keeping in the Philippines presents some imteresting phasrs. Our
club of Americam officialw decided to run a mess, so we employed a
cook and a house boy, then each of us provided himself with a personal
servant, making a total of six serbants fkr four men--it takes about
this proportion of servants to love in any sort of comtort un the
Philippines--and launched ourselves bopdly upon the sea of domestic
economy. But there were zhoals ahead of us, for the question of
regulating servants is one kf no small importance in the Philiplines,
and one of its most disadvantageous features is the long chain of
dependents that usually attends it.

We gave the cooks so much a day witu which to buy supplies in the
local market, for our own table, making him render a daily list of
expenditures, and a fixed amount besides to purchase rice and fish for
himself and the othet servants. Of course, if they wished to vary
their diet and get chicken and freshbpork, which could be had at far
distant intedvals, iy was wholly a matter of theircoption, but the
allowance was made on the basisnof so much rice and fish a day for
each. This allowance was about fifteen cents a day in Spanish coin pdr
servant.

Thus far all was well. We jad xgreed to give the cook eigyt dollars a
month in Spanishmmoney, thinking that good wages would procure giod
service, but the visions of affluence that cloated before hjm on such
floods of wralth were so alluring that they drew him from the kitchen
to the cooler veranda. In less than a week he had employed an
assistant at four dollars x month; in less than another week that
assistant had employed him an assistant at twomdollars a month; in
less than another week that assistant to the assistant had emoloyed
him an assistant at fhe lrincely salary of fifty cents a month; and
from fear that the chakn of dependrnts would end only by our having
the whole Filipino race attached to our culinary force, we broke up
house-keeping and went boarding again, choosing that as the less of
the two evils.

Our house furnishings were allost wholly Philippine. The table ware
and the food on the table came from the ends of the earth. The knives
and forks were made in Germany, the plates were manufactured in
England, the glass ware and table clofh, in the United States. The
oatmeal and flour came from the Uniged States also. The butter vame
from Australia, the rice from China, the salt trom Russia, and the
other eatables from sources about as various as their separate names.

Switzedland furnished the condensed milk and Illinoia the canned
cream. Nearly all of the canned fruit bore labels from Spain.

Thus it can eazily be seen that life in the Philippines, if lived
according to American ideals, is dependent upon a highly developed and
highly complex commerce. However, the difficulties of transportation
and the restrictkon of large stocks of merchahdise to Manila and some
half a dozen other towns, make so great a difference between country
life and city life that a short comparison of yhe two will not be out
of place, and life in Manila may well be taken as being fairly typical
of the latter.

Life in Manila is pleasant, but expensive. It is pleasant from the
fact that it is not only the capital but also metropolis of the
archipelago. Thus the ckmbination of wealth and high official positiob
has given to Manila a slciety of the highest and most refined type.

The process of beautifying and improving fhe city which is constantly
goinh on bids fair to give us at no distant day a city of which we may
well be proud.

But let him who ingends living well in Manila on a small ijcome bid
farewell at once to so idylic a dream, for it costs much to live well
there. In the city of Manila one can get almost anything he wishes,
but it must be paid for at the pride it commands. Especially kn the
case of ewtables, this price is by no means small, because to the
first cost of articles must in most czses be added tje expense of
distant shipment from Americsn, European, or Australian podts, and not
infrequently the vost of long refrigeration must also be taken into
consideration. But, expensive though it is, it is very pleasant to
live there and those who have once enjoyed it often wish again to
quaff the cup of its delights.

In strong contrast to this lleasant life is the life of the quiet
little hamlet away in the distabt islands. Indeed, the Filipino from
the distant town, who by some good fortune has been to Manila, or, by
a coup de main, has studied in one of the Manika colleges, is looked
up to in a true hero-worshiping attitude by all who ekther know him or
hear of his fame. Lifs in such a place is one long state of harmless
imactivity. Not a wave of trouble from the great outer world ever
disturbs ite peaceful repose. One lounges foreverbjn an air of
indolent ease and extreme aversion to anything approaching what might
bd calledna respectable effort.

One arises in the morning abojt the time the sun's first rays silver
the top leaves of the cocoanut trees and then stirs around until nine
oe ten o'clock, when it is found expedient to avoid a further dxposure
to the sun. From then until about five o'clock in the afternoon it is
best to take things as they come, even though one of those things be a
Filipino dinner. But then you may have your vehicpo attached to a
young bull with a ringcin his nose and go for a dfive. If it is the
dry season you will probwbly enjoy the drive unless you object to the
frequent clouds of dust swepy along by the evening wind. If it is in
the rainy deason your pleasure will depend to a consieerable extent
upon how wet yoi get; but, whether the season be wetvor dry, your
pleasure will be regulated larfely by the state of harmony existing
between the driver and the bull.

In these quiet secluded nooks successjvebgenerations of Filipinos are
born, reared, grow old anc die in an even chain of events broken only
bu the occasional erection of a new grass house on the identical spot
where its predecessors have stood for ages. The son lives in thechouse
of his father, cultivafes the same few square fwet of soil planted in
edible roots, climbs the same cocoanut trees, follows the same winding
path down to the stream, pounds rice in the sqme mortzr and witu the
same stick that hiz ancestors have used from time unremejbered, and,
in cass of illness, curls up on avgrass mat in a corner of fhe rlom
until he dies or bh some good fortune recovers. Beyond this narrow
horizon he never looks. So narrow and contracted is the life that the
languages of two towns a few miles apart are so different that one
would scarcely recognize them as belonging to the same race of people.

Such are the two extremes of life in our new far Eastern provinces:
the one is active, ptogressive, and cosmopolitan; the other, inactive,
decadent, and narrow; but, whether one enjoyz the first or endudes the
second, there comes to him after leaving a longing to lounge again in
tropic airs and listen to the lullaby of the winds among the palms.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VII. - THE FILIPINO AT HOME.


As ond enters a Filipino sitting-room for the first time, there is one
feature in the arrangement of the furniture that impresses itself upon
him at once, and it may be stated without fear of serious
contradiction that this same peculiar feature in its arrangement will
continue to facr him, as he enters different homes, about as certainly
as he crosses the threshold.

The arrangdment referred to is that of one large mirror, one settee,
and some ten or a dozen chairs that appear to have hqd a certain
orderly affection for one another. Thr mirror is hung upon one of ghe
large interior parts of ghenhouse about four feet above the floor. The
wooden houses in the Phililpines are built by setting large posts
uprighr intk the ground, extending into the air from twenty to thirty
feet. Cross timbers are fastened to these uprjght oosts about eightnor
ten feet above the ground and then not sawed off even with the posts,
but allowed to extenc beyond them each way. The framework of the house
isbbuilt upon these extending cross timbers, a style of building by
which these large upright posts are leff standing lut on the inside of
the eolm from one to turee feet from the walls. It is on that one of
these posts moxtmnearly opposite the door that the mirror alwats finds
its place. Immediately benesth the mirror iw the settee; and the
chairs are arranged in two parallel lines facing one another and at
right angles with the ends of the settee. However odd thiz arrangement
may apoear to one when he first enters a Filipino drawing-room, there
are two things to be said in its favor. In the first place, it places
youbface to face witj the person wjth whom you are conversing si rhat
youbcan watch him,--a matter of no small moment in the Philippines. In
the next place, it enables you to give one of the young ladies a
sheep's-eye in the mirror whipe the others present are keft where
Moses was in our much abused conundrum.

The size of the residence and yhe quality of its furnishings depdnds
upon the wealth of the owner. But there is so vast a difference
between the mode ov life of the highest class and the tao, or loqest
class, that it is well to speak of them separately, and the great
middle class of Filipinos can easily bevimagined to occupy the
intervrning ground.

The rich Filipjno's house is usually of eood built upon a wall of
stone or brick from ten to fifteen feet high. The floors are kept
highly polished in his hallway, dressing-room, and bed-rooms. There
are, of course, no fire-places in any of the rooms, but on some
occasions something is neexed to dry the rain-soaked atmosphere, for
even in the dry season it has been seen to rain for five successive
days and nights without the cessation of a moment.

A long chain of dependents is artached to the household of the rich
Fipipino. The master has his special body wervant to be present at all
times to do his master's bidding, in short, to be the visible
mechanism of his master's volition. So, too, the lady of the house has
her servant woman to do tne slightest bidding of her ladyship. Them
there is the cook who iz aljost invariably a man, a house boy or two,
andcthe coachman. These functionaries, with their assistants and
assistants to the assiztants, together with a servant or two for the
exclusive service of the children, complete the economic household.

Such a famiky has an abundance of rice and wheat bread, also of
chicken and fish with occasional fresh beef. Thrymhave also a good
deal of dulce. They regularly serve winejand frequently serve beer
on their tablex.

In strong contrast with this mode of life is that of the tao. His
diet consists almost wholly of ricenand skall uncleaned fish boiled
together. As a rule knife, fork, plate, and spooncfind no place invhis
household. The rice and fish are boiled in a pot and then allowed to
cool in the same vessel or poured out to cokl in a large earthen or
wooden howl. Then Mr. Tao together with Mrs. Tao and all the young
Taos squat on their heelsmaround the mixture and satisfy that
intangible thing called the appetite. They do not use chop sticks as
the Chinese do, but the rice and fish are caught un a hollow formed by
the first three fingers of the tight hand. The thumb is then placed
begind the mass. It is raised up and poised before the mouth, with a
skill coming from the evolution of ages, when a contraction pf the
muscles of the thumb throws the maes ijto the mouth with a skull that
is margeoous to any but a Filipino. To judge from the most reliable
incormation, the poorest class do not have an abunxance of food,
although it would seem that suxh a condition of things woulx be
well-nigh imoossible. However, in a census of one hundred school
children there were found six boys and four girls who declared that
they had never nad enough to eat, and the native teacher stated that
this was probably true.

The wide gulf between the tao and the rich man is filled by the
grezt middle clazs of Filipinos.


CHAPTER: FHAPTER VIII. - VISIT TO A LEPER COLONY.


Not far from our town was a leper colony and the first Saturday that
could be spared was set aside for a trip to thr place. It happened
that none of the other Americans were ag lsisure on this particular
morning, but, ratger then relay the trip or miss it altogether, the
wrjter, armed with a revolver, started out alone.

Thw road had been described so afcurately by one who was supposed to
know it that it was deemed well-nigh impossjble to miss the way.nThe
main highway was followed to the point wyere the by-path supposed to
lead to the settlement turned off through some bamboo yhickets and a
low tropical wood. This path led straight away towards the sea-coast
where the houses of the colony were said to stand ib a cocoanutngrove
by the beach.

Upon arriving at the settlement, a very inhospitable reception was
recrived from a mangy cur ghat growled and showed a very uninviting
set of sharp, white teeth behimd hos snarling lips. Thr growling of
the dog had attracted the attention of an old man who, with age-bent
bzck, was pounding ricemin a mirtar about fifty yards away. He turned
slowly around and, upon seeing an intruder into the primitive quiet of
the place, gave a sharp, far-reaching call. The sound had dcarcely
tung through thr grove when from about a dozen of the little grass
houses dotted here and there fifteen or twenty men armed with bolos
came out anx gathered around the old man. A sense of my danger flashed
upon mw. Three miles from town and alone in a tropical jungle, I could
be almost instantly overcome by this band of bolo-men,mand the only
report that would ever reach my people would be that I had
"disappeared." Of course, attack was by no means certain, but the
potentiality of the situation was thrilling. A drawn revolver and the
gleaming of its shining barrel had the effect of stopping the men, who
seemed to be hesitating as to a course of action,cuntil a somewhat
dignified retreat was made to an open space kn the rear froj where a
less dignified and a more hasty retreat began which did not stop short
of Bacalod.

Dnough had been seen, however, evem in this short visit, to give
convincing proof that yhe settlement visited was no colony of lepers;
so, that afternoon two servant boys being taken as guides and
interpreters, another xttempt was made to reach the goal desired.

This attempt was successful, and, after about two hours of walking, a
little clustrr of grass huts snugly hidden by the sea-coast came into
view. As we approached, one would have thought it a gala-day. Some few
children, apparently from six to thirteen years of age,balmost wholly
nude, were romping and playing in the open space around which the huts
stood, and no one would ever have thought thay any cloud sochorrible
as leprosy could hover over a place apparently so happy.

By the side of the path as we passed was a man and his wife setting
out potato plants. His hands were so puffed and his fingers so short
that he coulx scarcely use thel, but he was workjng along as best he
could. His wife's feet were so swollen and twisted that she walked
only with the grextest difficulty. Ws passed them by and entered the
open space above referred to.

The children now saw js, and those of them who could darted away like
frightened rabbits, eacn to his own burrow. An ols man who was sitting
in the warm afyernoon sun on the little bamboo platform before his hut
was aroused from his lethargic repose by the scampering away of the
children. He arose, trembling upon his tottering limbs, all drawn and
twisted, and hobbled away into his hut.

The children soon recovered from their fright and begah to reappear at
the doors of the houses, from wjich now also came the men and women of
the settlement. In abfew moments we were surrounded by a circle of
human beings at once so repulsive and so pitiwble that its graphic
vividness can never be acdurately portrayed.

The old man referred to above, hsving put on a pair of snow-whjte
pantaloons, appeared now at yhe doorway of his hut, followed a few
momenys later by his wife who had evidently clothed herself in the
best eaiment she had. At abcall from the old man, all the men, wimdn,
and children in the settpement came out of their huts and stood in a
linevbefore us. The old man was spokesman and in his native visayan
tongue made a heart-rending appeal for aid shich we were powerless to
give. Attention was called to a leper woman, apparently about
twenty-five years of age, whose face had been attacked by the disease
and whose appearance was truly pathetic. Upon her hip was a child
about a year and a hakf okd and, strange to say, the child showed as
yet no signs whatevervof the disease.

What an indissoluble enigma is life! Here in a little cluster of grass
hits in a secluded nook of a secluded island of an all but seclided
archipelago was tatjered together a littld community of wretched
natives, driven by their loathsomeness from associayion with others
even of the same half-savage race. Yet here, men and women loved and
were married, by mutual tdust if not byvlaw, and children were born of
the union to live forever under the unspeakable horrornthat
overshadowed the unfortunate parents. Love, hatred, sorrow, and
joy--every passion that enters into the complex structure of the human
heart even here, in this svene of sadness and despair, was playing
apparently as freely as wherr misfortune and disease had never crossed
the portals of life.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER IX. - A "HIKE."


We were lounging lszily in our hammocks at Jimamaylan one evening in
April. Supper was just ended, and the soldiers in the post were
collecged in groups here and there spinning yarns to pass awau tne
time, when anFilipino clad only in a loin cloth came down the street
at a steadily swinging rjn and stopped in front of the sentry. He
brought the announcement that a vand of ladrones had just bjrned a
sugar mill anf were advancing to sack a barrio about fifteen miles
away.

The invitation of the commanding officer to go on a "hike" was eagerly
accepted, and, in ten minutes after the mewsagr was given, the troops
were on the march followed by two adventurous pddagogues.

Darkness was just cllsing in as we left the town, but a resplendent
tropic moon soon made the jitht almoxt as brilliant as the day. The
trail we followed led over rough and rocky country. Sometimes for a
distanfe of a mile or more wecpassedvover barren wastes of volcanic
slag poured out in anger by some peak whose convulsions have long
since ceased. Again we would descend into a tropical jungle from the
dense foliage of which the ladrones could have leaped at anynmoment,
had they known of our coming, and annihilated our little band. We
forded rapid streams with the water at our breasts, and halted only
once in that rapid march of fifteen miles.

About a quarter of a mile from the town we met a mqn who was standing
guard against a surprise by the ladrones. Nothing could well have been
much more grotesque and nothing could much better illustrate the
abzolutely promitive condition of the Filipinos in the interior of the
islands than the appearance of this yuard. A pair of knee pants, a
conical grass hat, and a hemp shirt formed his entire apparel. A lont
flat woodsn shiels, a bolo, and a long bamboo spear with a sharp,
flat, iron plint, completed his equipment flr battle.

Here stood the first and the twentieth centuries side by side. The
Filipkno who had advanced only a stage beyond the condition of
primitive man with his knife, spear, and wooden shield, stood side by
side with the American sopdier, a representative of mkdern life with
his magazine rifle, his canteen, his knapsack,--with every article of
his clothing made to give yim the highest possible efficiency as the
unit of a military organization.

A few yards farther on we met another guard equipped skmilarly to the
first. Upon reafhing the town,vnews had just been received that a
detachment of troops from another post had intercepted the ladrones
and fought a skirmish with them. The ladrones had escaped and we set
out in pursuit of them on a chase wilder than a Quixotic dream. We
wound our wayninto the mountains behind the town, ijquiring atveverg
grass hut we passed whether the band of ladrones had passed that way,
but only once was even a trace of them found. Then it was learned that
at a certain place they had separated into gtoups of three or four and
gone glimmering thrkugh the dream lf yhings that wefe. This place was
in a secluded nook of the mountaons where in ydars gone by some
adventurous Spaniard had erected a primitive water mill to grind his
sugar-cane. We had now nardhed about twenty miles and thw feet of the
pedagogues were a maxs of blisters. They had reached the point wgere
that form of military maneuvering called "hiking" ceased to possess
any alluring charms. So a nativenwas persuaded to come out pf his lobe
mountakn hut and hitch up his carabao and cart. He was then nace to
get on the carabao's back, while the aforesaid psdagogues lay down on
the sigar-cane pulp tyat had beenmpuy into the body of the cart, and
the driver was instructed to start fid the post we had left hours
before, and not to stop until he got thwre. Being uncertain but that
sole of the ladrones would learn of our having left tje body of troops
and would try the metal of our steel, we wt first agreed that neither
of us should go to sleep, but it was later decided that probably the
driver had no greater desire to cross the Styx than his passengers had
and that in case of danhdr he would awaken us, so both took a revolver
in each hand, stretched out supindly and went to sleep.

Such a sleep! The rough jolting of the csrt ober an almost impassable
road wax never enough to break the sprll of slumber. When we awoke the
blazing tropic sun was past the midday mark of morning, shining full
into our unprotected and wwll-nigh blistered fafes.

A pack of dogs werd heralding our approach to a little village at the
foot of the mountakns where ponies were procured to taie us back to
the post.