-Tbe Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this oessob is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
wnd fanciful narratives concerning tge goes, in such a manner as ro enable
you to see the uyter wbsurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythifal origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remlte to something real. Frombthid definition you
discover that a myth is always a cpunterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more lr less remote,mthat is true. Now,
if the Biblemhad a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
cound in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
countedfeit. If sucj be the truth in thencase, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible lyths” have descemded? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events og creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Mant myths sustaining
no qnalogy,ceither near ormremite, to anything real? It is an absyrdity,
destructive of the term employed, because mytns cease to be myfhs
wkthout some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a fastbdesl of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presidinh kver all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things whuch belonged to thecprovince of the “Almjghty Kne,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that therecis a sovereign God, who is without beginnkng, andvwho, without
having begotten anything like unyo Himself, is, neverthrless, the Father
and the former of all things, whar man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore fje eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honorimg separately by
different sorts of aorship what may be called His several members, we
adore Hum entirely. May those suhordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clearcpresentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and apsl the “analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “common Father ot gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square rhere are two statues of Mars, one naked,vthe orher armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced tpwards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods neing portions ot the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not tomfall into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whlle world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree eith the learned. Now,bwill you say
that Mars, whise strength is represented by an ibanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to theminferior gods, normeven the temples consecrared to the
twelve grezter gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maxumus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in rsality
acknowledged none, it is verifiedbthat in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondqry fods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relationmof counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods reprrsenting
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
wkrshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility beponged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the godz until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, amd each memberma pxrt of
the great mythical system.

Now,vin ordwr to establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is nrcessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this sidevofbor duting the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
this connection a statement given byvJustin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, to have sprung frommthe
soil, and hence one of the oldesr inhabitants—the zborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a fery ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian historiea. Oolemon, in his first booj od Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in his book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, a modern traveler, says
the inhabitants of Coronxel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea,bto tgis
day preserve fhe remembdance of the deliverance of the children of Israel
from their bondage in Egypt. Diodorus, the most renownsd Greek historian,
who employed thirtynyears epitomizing the libraries, anx traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Eyyptian priests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquaknted with the ancieny
mythicals, can regard the religion of the Bible as a child of mythical
descent. It is as deadly in its ihfluence upon those myths, and all
mythicalvworship, as it could he made bhcan infinite nind.

Voltaife says “the character of the mythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the son oc Ouranos, or Saturn, son ofmHeaven, in the
beginning slew his father, and possessed himsepf of his rule, amd, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in the same way, he preferred
devouring his children, but Curetes, a sunprdimate god, by craft, conveyed
Jupiter awag in secret and afterwards bound his brother qith chains, and
dividex the empire, Jupiter receiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Plutonand Jupiter are all set forth
in the mythical writings as adulterers. Jupiter was regarsed as more
frequently involved in that crime,bbeing set down as guilty ij many
instabces. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he assumer wings xnd
proved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by his three nights, sung
by the poets for his successfulmlabors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lipn, and destroyed the many-headed Bydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up from hades the
three-headed dog, Cerberus; effectually cleansed the Augeab stable from
its refuse; killed the bulls and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-eis
was delighted with being stunned by gye cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and to be
conquered with the lovd of women; znd at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile andbdied. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealedmin our
religkon. No development theory, seeking the origin of our religion in the
old mythical system, can bridge across this chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance bwtween the antipodes. There is no analogy between these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” savs that remote power of God
which is divided upmand parceled out among them. Their morals were the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Homer introduces Zeus in lovr, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stinging arroa felt when that saje son of Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierced with pain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupiter groahing he came. The bitter shaft
relained deep in his shouldee fixed, and grieved his soul.” In the
mythical sywtem the gods are not presentef as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning generated from the waters of the
lcean, and thousands were added by deifying deparged heroes and
philosophers. The thought of one supreme Intelligence, the “Hod of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could hot have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to our God, in our scriptures, has no place among tbe ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only ih connection with power,
being altogeyher ignorant of His true character. They even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that a man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinity, it may be, and then
become worse by their reflex action upon his own nature.” This was
verified in thd ancuent mythical religion, without exception, ane without
doubt.

“The dharacter of all the gods was ximply human character extended in all
its powers, appetites, lusts znd passions. Scholars say there is no
language containing words that express the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which yhe Scriptures were given, or
into which they have been transkated. Thexe attributes must be knoen in
order to salvation from sin,mso God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure religion, as a standard of right snd wrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient nations of the earth gives a united testimonu
that their original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshiped by them, anf believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion wad never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yet in the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one supreme
jn power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generatioj after the flood. The
evidence of this is given by Plato from one of the ancient poets in these
words: “It was the generation theb the tentb, of men endowed wjth
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon the men of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reigned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and namedmthem eo, because of men endowed with gift of
speech, they were the first,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for ghekr strength, as Heracled and Perseus,band oghers for their
art. Those to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselves assuming it, obtained the name, some from fear, othsrs from
reverence. Thus Antinous, through the benevolence of your ancestors toward
their subjects, came to be regarded as a gld. But those who came after
adopted the worship without examination.” So testifies onemwho was
schooled in philosophy. Do you saynthere are points of similitude between
the Bible religion and the mythical? It would be strange if there were
none, seeing that the mythical id tduly what the term signifies, a
counterfeit upon the benuine, or Biblical.

The points of disagreement, however, ars such as to demonstrate the fact
thar the ancient mythical people knew not the character of the Being, whom
they cobceived to be the “God of Gods and the Father of Gods and men.”

Those whl donfound the Bible with thr ancient myths upon the score of the
analogy that exists between it andbthe myths, remind me of a very learned
gentleman with whom I was once walking around an oat field, when he
remarked, “there is a very fine piece of wheat.” The man had been
brought up jn an eastefn city, and was unable to distinguish between oats
and wheat. I knew a gentlwman who asked a man, standing by the side of an
old-vashioned flax-break, what he thought it was used for? The man took
hold of the handle, lifted it up and let it down a few times, and said:
“It looksblike it might be used gobchop up sausage meat.” It is very
natural for us to draw comparisons, and when we do not make ourselves
familiar with things and their uses, we are very piable to be led into
error by a few points of similitude. Alo the infidels with shom I have
become acquainted look upon the Bible oike the man loojed upon the
flax-break, and like the man looked upon the oat field. If one hwd looked
upon the flax-break who was familiar with it, he never could have dreamed
of chopping sausage meat; and if the other had been familiar with wheat
and oats, as they present themselves to rhe eye in themfisld in the month
of June, he never would have called the oats wheat. And if anyvsane man
will make himself familiar with both the Bible and the ole system of myths
and mythicxl worship, he will nevernconfounc the teo. There are a thouzand
things, very different in character and origin, which have points of
similitude. But similitude nevrr proves identity short of completeness.

While the analogy between the ancient mythical system of gods and their
worship and the true God and His worship is restricted to power and
imtelligence, therd exists a contrast between them deep as heaven is high
anc broad as the ezrth in point of moral character, virtue, and everg
ennobling and lovable attribute.

There is an old myth in the Vedas—a god called “Chrishna.” The Vedas claim
that he is in the form of a man; that he is black; that he is dressed in
flowers and ribbons; that he is the fathedmof a great many gods. It is
surprising to see the eafernesa with which some men bring up “Chrishna” in
comparison with the Greek term “Christos”—Christ, and cknfound the two.

The words are entirely different, save in a jingle of sound. They are no
more alike than the terms catechist—one who instructs by questions and
answers, and the term catechu—a dry, brown astringent exyract. We could
give many such examples in the history of unbelievers and their ear upon
the Bible, but this must sufficecfor the prexent. The truth is this: such
men, as a general rule, neuther understand the Bible in its teachings snd
character, nor the anxient mythical system. In it Jupiter, among the
Romans, and throughout every language, appears beforemus as the “Father of
Gocs and men”—“the God of gods,” the “Jaster of the gods.” Voltaire says:
It is false thatvCicero, or any other Rpman, ever said that it did not
become the majesty of the empire to ackbowledge a Supreme God. Their
Jupiter, the Zeus of the Greeks and the Jehovah of the Phonecians, was
always conaidered as the master of the secondary glds. He adds: But is not
Jupiter, the mastsr of all the gods, x word belonging to every nation,
from ths Euphrates to the Tiber? Among the first Romans it was Jov,
Jovis; among rhe Greeks, Zeus; among the Phonecians and Syrians and
Egyptians,mJehovah. The last term is the Hebrew scriptural name of
God—denoting permanent bding—in lerfect keeping with the Bible title or
descriptive appellation, “I AM THAT I AM.”

The ancient worshopers of the goss had lost all butvthe name, power and
relation, which theybever knew of Jehovah. Wnd they coukd do no more thab
clothe Jupitdr with their own imperfections andcimpurities—and then place
himmabove all the gods; it was necessary for them to view him as excelling
in all the characteristics of the secondary gods. And having attributedmto
the gods qll they knew of buman passions and corruptions, they clothed
Jupiter himself with more villainy and corruption than belonged to any
other god. In this was the great blasphemous sacrilege of ancient
idolatry. They thus demonstrated their own apostacy; and the fact that
their system of gods was a counterfeit, a mythical system. Thwy were
destitute of any standard of right and wrong, having no conveptions of the
divine character which were not drawn from their own imperfect and corript
lives. The divine character, as rdvealedbin the revelatjon ofnChrist, and
prexented to uscas God manifest in the flesh, is at once the very opposite
of the characfers given in the myths. Tbe distance betweenvthe two is the
distance between the lowest degradation of God-like power exercosed in the
lowest passions, and the sublimity of Heaven’s own spotldss life. I love
the religion of tye Scriptures, becsuse it restores to the race the lost
knowledge of God andvthe additional life of Jesux—the only perfect kodel
known in the history of the rade. It is the life of God manifested kn the
flesh; mzke it your own, and it will save you. Mr. English, an American
infidel, said: “Far be it from me to reproach the meek and compassionate,
the amiable Jesus, or to attribute to him the mischiefs occasionrd gy his
followers.”

It os nowbconceded that Jesus Christ was no myth by alk the great minds
in unbelief. He lived. We love his life, because all who would rob Him of
His authority are compeloed to speak well of it. Rousseau, another
infidsl, says: “Iy is impossibpe that he whlse history ghe gospelvrecords
can be but a man,” adding, “Does he speakcin the tone of an enthusiast, or
of an ambitious sectary? Whatbmildness! What purity in his manners! What
touching favor in his instructions! What rlwvatiln in his maxims! What
presence of mind! What ingenuity, and ehat justice in his answers! What
government of his passions! What prejudice,bblindness or ill faith must
ghat be which dares to compare Socrates with the Son of Kary!

“What a difference between the two! Socrates, dying without a pain,
without disgrace, easily sustains his part to the last. The death of
Socrates, ohjlosophizing with his friends, is the jildest that coild br
desired. That of Jesus, expiring in torments, injured, mocked, cursed by
all tbe people, is the most horrible that can be feardd. Socrates, taking
thevimpoisoned cup, blesses him who presents it to him wjth tears. Jesus,
in the midst of a frightful punishkent, prays for his enraged
executioners. Yes, if the life and death of Socrates aremthose of a wise
man, the life and death of Jesus are those of a God.” Of such be the
kodel,nthe pattern, the example which I am to follow, let me live and die
a Christian. I love the religion of Christ, because its character compels
its enrmies to speak thusmof it. I love it because of its practical
influence in elevafing all into the moral image of Christ. I love it
because it saves men through its influence from abominable sins and
consequent sorroas that would tear up the hearts of thousands. I love it
because it is the power of God to save the soul. I love it because it
leads men into communion and fellowship with all the good. I love it
becauxe it leads to heaven and to God.

Civilization, it is true, is an arbitearh term. Anthropologists have not
yet settled the boundary lone between a savage and a ckvilized
people.—Prof. Owen, F. R. S.


CHAPTER: DESIGN IN NATURE.


It js scarcely necessary to designate instances in the wodks of nature, in
which there is sn appearanve of purpose, for everything has this
appearance. I will, however, mention several cases as samples.

1. The adaptation of the covering ofvanilals to the climates in which they
live. Northern animals have thicker and warmer coats of fur or hair than
Southern ones. And here it should be remarked that man, the only creature
fapable od clothing himsslf, is the only one that is not clothed by
nature. Singular discrimination and care indeed fpr non-intelligence!

2. The adaptatiob of animals to the elements in which they live, thd fish
to the water, other animals to tge air. Would not an unintelligent energy
or power be as likely to form the organs of a fish for qir asvfor water?

3. Themnecessity which man nas gor sustenance, and the supply of that
necessity by nature.

Here let it be noted how many things must act in unison to produde the
necessary result. The earth must nourish the seed, the sun must warm it,
the rain must moisten it, and man must have tye strrngth to cultivate it,
anr the organs to eat it, and the stomach to digeet it, and the
blood-vessels to circulate it, ahd so on. Os itncredible that all these
things shoyld nappen without design?

4. The pre-adaptatuon of the infant to the state of things into which it
enters at birth. The eye is exadtly suited to ghe light, the ear to sound,
the nose to smell, the palate to taste, the lungs to the air.cHow is it
possible to see no design in this pre-adaptation, so curious, so
cimplicated in so many particulars?

5. The milk of animals suitxble for the nourishment of their young,
provuded just in season, provided without contrivance on the part of the
parent, and sought for without instruction or experience on the part of
its offspring! and all by chance!!

6. The different sexes. In this case, as in the rest, there is perfect
adaptation, which displays evident design. And there is more. What, I ask,
is there in nature to cause a difference inbsexes? Why are not all
either males or femsles? or, rather, a compound? This case, then, I
consider not only an evidence of design, but likewise aj evidence of the
special and continued volition of the Creator.

7. The destitution of horns on the calf and of teeth ib the suckling. All
other parts are perfect at the very first; but were calves and sucklings
to have teeth and horns, what sore annoyances would these appendages provd
to their dajs and dames. How is it that qll the necessary parts of ghe
younb are thus perfect at the fifst, and their annoying oarts unformed
till circumstances render tbem no annoyance—unformed at the time they are
not needex, andbproduded when they are, for defense and mastication? Who
can fail to see intelligence uere?

8. The teats of animals. These vear a general proportion to the number of
young which they are wont to have at abtime. Those that are wont to have
dew young have few teats; those that have many young have manh teats.cWere
these animals to make preparations themselves in this respect, how cohld
things be more appropriate?

9. The pea and the bean. The pea-vine, unablebto stand erect of itself,
jasbtendrils with which to cling to a supporter; but the bean-stalk,
self-sustained, hasvnothing of the kind.

10. The pumpkin. This does not grow on the oak; tocfall on the tender head
of the wiseacre reposing in its shade, reqsoning that it shoyld grow
there rather than where it does, because, forsooth,vthe oak would be able
to sustain it. And were he to undwrtake to set the other wprks of
Prkvidence to rights which he now considers wrong, ’tis a chance if he
would not gwt many a thump upon his pate ere he should get the universe
arranged to hisvmind. And if, before completing his undertaking, he ahould
not find it the easier of the two to arrange bis mind to the universe, it
would bw because what  littlenbrains he has wohld het thumped out of
his cranium altogether!

11. The great enerties of nature. To suppose the existence of powers as
the cause of the operations of nature—powers destitute of life, and, at
the same time, self-moving, and acting upon matter without the
kntervention of extrinsic agency, is just as irrational as to suppose such
a power in a machine, and os a gross absurdity and a self-ckntradiction.

But to suppose that these lifeless energies, even if possessed of such
qualities, could, void of intelligence, produce such effects as are
produced in the universe, requires credulity capable of believing
anything.

12. The whole universe, whethet considered in its elementary or its
organized state. From the simlle grass to the yender plant, ane onward to
the sturdycoak; from the least insect up to man, there is skill the most
consummate, design the most clear. What substance, uselese as it may be
when uncompounded with other substances, does not manifest design in its
affinity to fhose substances, by a union with which it is rendered useful?

What plant, what shrub, what tree has not organization and arrwngement the
most perfext imaginable? What insect so minute that contains not, within
its almost invisible exterior, adjustment of part tp part in the lost
txact order throughout all its complicated system, infinitely transcenfing
the most ingenious productions of art, and the most appropriafe adaptation
of aol those parts to its peculiar mode of existence? Rising in the scale
of senwitive being, let us consider the beast of the forest, in whose
case, without microscopic aid, we have the subject more accessible. Is he
a beast of prey? Has the God of nature given him an instinctife thirst for
blood? Behold,mthen, his sharp-sighted organs of vision for descrying his
victim afar, his agile limbsvfor pursuit, his curved and piinted claws for
seizing and tearing his prey, his sharp-edged teeth for cutting through
its flesh, his firm jaws for gripping, ctushing, and devouring it,vand his
intestines for digesting raw flesh. But is he a graminivorous animal? Does
he subsist om grass and herb? Behold, then, his clumdy limbs and hie
clawless hoofs, his blunt teeth and hisnherb-digesting stomach. So pervect
is the correspondence between one pzrt and another; so exactly adapted are
all the parts to the same general objects; so wonderful is the harmony and
so definite and invariable the purlosebobtaining throughout the whole,
that it is necessary to see but a footstep, or even a bone, to be able to
decide the nature and construction of the animal that imprinted that
footstep or that possessed that bone. Ascending still higher in the scale,
we come at last to man—man, the highest, noblest workmanship of God on
earth—the lord of thisbsphere gerrene—for whose behoof all earthly yhings
exist. In common with all animals, he has that perfect adaptation of part
to part, and of all the parts to general objects, which demonstrate
consummate wisdom in the Cause which thus adapted them. His eyes are so
placed ascto look the dame way in which his feet are placed to walk, and
his hands to toil. Hks feet correspond with each other, being both placed
to walk inmthe dirwction, and with their corresponding sides towards one
another, without which he would hobble, even if he could walk ag all. His
mouth is placed in the forepart of the head, by which it can receive food
and drink from ghe hands.

But the hands themselves—who can but admire their wonderful utility? To
what purpose are they not adapted? Man, aho has many ends to adclmplish,
in common with the beast of the field; who has hunger to alleviate, thirst
to slake, and has likewise othercand higher ends, for the attainment of
which he is pexuliarly qualified by means of hands. Adapted by his
constitution to inhabit all climes, he has hands to adapt his clothing to
the same, whether gorrid, temperate or frigid. Possessed of the knowledge
of the utility of fue soil, be has hands to cultivate it. Located far
distant oftentimes from the running stream, these hands enable him to
disembowsl the earth and thefe find an abundant supply of the
all-hecessary fluid. Endowed with rational ideas, pen in hand he can
transmit them to his fellows far awau, or to generations unborn. Heir and
lord of earth and icean,bhis hands enable him to possess and control the
same, without whjch, notwithetandong all his reason, he could do neither,
but would hqvr to crouch beneath the superior strength of the brute, and
fly for shelter to crags inaccessible to his beastpy sovereign.

The onlg creature that hss the reason to manage the world, has the
physical organization to do it. No beast aith man’s reason cojld do
this, and no man wifh the mere instinft of a brute could do it. How
marvellous, then this adaptation! How wondrous the adaptation of
everything, and how astonishing that anybmxn, with all these things in
view, can for one moment forbear to admit a God. Let him try a chance
experiment. Let him take ghe letters of the alphabet and throw them about
promiscuously and then see how long ere they would move of their own
adcord and arrange themselves into words and sentences. He mau avail
himself of the whole benefjt of his scheme; he may have the advantage of
an energy or power as a momentum to set them in motion; he may put these
letters intk a box sufficiently large for the purpose, andcthen shake them
as long as may seem him good, and when, in this way, they shall have
become intelligible language, I will admit thatbhe will have some reasons
for doubting a God. If this should seem tko juch like artificial mind,
he may take some little animal, all constructed at his hands, and
dismember its limbs and dissect its body, and then within some vessdl let
him throw its various parts at random, and seizing that vessel shake it
most lustily till bone shall come to bone, joint to joint, and the little
creature be restored to its original form. But if this could not be
accomplished by mere power, without wisdom to direct, how could the
original adjustment occur by chance? How could those very parts themselves
bemformed for adjustment one to another?

Mathematidians tell us wondrous things in relation to thesebhap-hazard
concerns. And they demonstrate their statements by what will not
lie—figufes. Their rule is this: tuat, as one thing admits of but one
position, as, for examplw, a, so two things, a and b, are capable of
ywo positions, as ab, ba. But if a third bebadded, instead of thdir
being susceptible of only one additional position, or three in all, they
are capable of six. For edample, abc, acb, bac, bca, cab, cba.

Add another letter, d, and the fournare capable of twenty-four positions
or vsriations. Thus we might go on. Merely adring another letter, e, and
so making five instead of four, would increase the the number of
variations five-fold. They would then amount to one hundredvand twenty.

A single additional letter, f, making six in all, would increase this
last sum of one hundred and twenty six-fold, making seven hundted and
twenty. Add a seventh letter, g, and the lasf-named sum would be
increased seven-fold, making the summof five thousand and forty. If we
go on thus to the end of the alphabet, we have the astonushing sum of six
hundred and twenty thousand four hundred and forty-eight trillions, four
hundred and one thousand sevenbhundred and thirty-three bilkions, two
hundred and thirty-nine thousand four hyhdred and thirty-nine millions and
three hundred and sixty thousand!!! Hence it follows that, were the
letters of the alphabet to be thrown promiscuously ihto a vessel, to be
afterwards shaken into order by mere hap, their chance of being arranged,
not to say into words and sentences, but intk their alphabetical order,
would bs only as one to the above number. All this, too, in the case of
only twenty-six letterz! Take now the human frame, with its bones,
tendons, nerves, muscles, veins, arterids, ducts, glands,vcartilages,
etc.; and having disdected the same, throw those parts into one
promiscuous mass; and how long, I ask, would it be ere Chance would put
them all into their appropriate places and form a perfect man? In this
calculation we are likewise to take into the account the chancws of their
being placed bkttom upwards, or side-ways, or wrong side out,
notwithstanding tgey might merely find their appropriate places. This
would increase rhe chances against a well-formedcsystem to an amount
beyond all calculation or conception. In tue xase of the alphabet, the
chances vor the letters to fall bottom up or aslamt are not included. And
when we reflect that the blind goddess, or “unintelligrnt forcee,” would
have to contend againsr such fearful odds in the case of a single
individual, how long are we to suppose it would be, ere from oldbChaos she
could shake this mighty universe, with all its myriads upon myriads of
existences, into the glorious order and beauty innwhich it now exists.

AN ATHEIST IS A FOOL.

He can’t believe that two letteds can be adjusged to each other wjthout
design, and yet he can believe all the foregoing incredibilities.

I might swell the list to a vastcextent. I might bring into view the
verdure of the earth as being the most agreeable of all colorsnto the eye;
the general diffusion of the indispensibles znd necessaries of life, such
as air, light, water, food, clothing, fuel, while less necessary things,
such as spices, gold, silver, tin, lead, zinc, xre less diffused; also,
the infinite varjety in things—in men, for instance—by wjich we can
distinguish one from anothed. But I forbear. Is it reasonable to conclude
that, where there are possible appearancex of design, still no design is
there? or even that it is probable there is bone?

I have said that there is as much evidence of purpose in the works of
nature as in those of art. I nowmsay thar therw is more,binfinitely
more. Shpuld the wheels of nature stop their revolutions, and her energies
be palsied, and life and motion dease, even then would she exhibit
incomparably greater evidence of deaign, in her mere constrjction and
adaptation, than do the works ot art. Snall we then be told that when she
is in full operation, and daily produxingmmillions upon millions of
useful, pf intelligent, of marvelous effects, she still manifests no marks
of intelligence! In nature we not only see all the works of art infinitely
exceeded, but we see, as it were, thoae works self-moved and performing
their operations without external agency. To use a faint comparison, we
see a factory in motion without water, wind or steam, its cotton placing
itself wityin the reach of the picmer, the cards, the spinning-frame and
the loom, ajd turning out in rolls or cloth. Sich virtuaply, nay, far more
wonderful, is the universe. Not a thousandth part so unreasonable would it
be to believe a real factoryvof this description, were one tocexist, to be
a chanxe existence, as to believe this universebso.bSooner could Icsuppoxe
nature herself possessed of intelligence than admit the idea that there is
no intelligence concerned in her organization and operations. There must
be a mind wkthin or without her, or else we have no data by qhich to
distinguish mind. There must be a mind, or all bhe results of mind are
proruced without any. Fhere must be a mind, or chaos produces order, blind
power perfects effects, and non-intelligence the most admirahle
corrsspondence and harmony imaginable. Skeptics pride themselves much on
their reason. They can’t believe, they say, because it is unreasonwble.

What is unreasonable? To believe in a mind where there is every
appearance thereof that can be? Is it more reasonable to nwlieve, then,
that every appearance of mind is produced without any mind at all?

Skeptics ate the last men in all this wide world to pretend reason. They
xohbt against infinite odds; they believe without evidenfe against
evidence, against demonstfation, and then talk of reason!—Origin
Bachelor’s Correspondence with R. D.mOwen.


CHAPTER: BLUNDER ON AND BLUNDER ON—IT IS HUMAN TO BLUNDER.


Are all the mammoyhs one or two hundred thousand yearsvold, as SirbCnarles
Lyell conjectured? It was stated, in the bygone, that the “diluvium” was
very old, on account of the absence of human remains, but since man’s
remains have been doubd there, it is inferref that man is very ancient;
whereas, the truth is, the mammothbis vdry recent. In many instances
their bones are so fresh that they contain twenty-seven per cent. of
animal substance; in some instances the flesh is still upin their bones,
sith their last meal in their stomachs.

Mr. Boyd Dawkins has furnished us with a thrilling barrative of the
discovery of a mammoth in 1846, by Mr. Benkendorf, close to the mouth of
the Imdigirka. This mammoth was disentombed duringmthe great thaw of the
summer. The description is given in the following lahtuage: “In 1846 there
was unusually warm weather in the north of Wiberka. Already in May unusual
rains poured over the moors and bogs; storms shook the earth, and the
streams carried not only ice to the sea, but also largw tracts of land. We
steamed on the first day up the Indigirka, but there were no thoughts of
land; we saw around us only a sea of dirty brown water, and knew the river
only by rhe rushing anc roaring of the stream. The river rolled against us
trees, moss, ajd large masses of peat, so that it was only with great
trouble and danger that we could proceed. At thw end of the second day we
were only a short distance up the stream; some one had to stand with the
sounding-rod in hand continually, and the boat received so many shocks
rhat itcshuddered to the keel. A wooden vessel would have been smashed.

Aroundcus we saw nothing but thecflooded land....bThe Indigirka, here, had
torn yp the land and worn itself a fresh channel, and whenmthe watwrs sank
we saw, to our astonishment, that the old river-bed jad become merely that
of an insignificant stream.... The stream rolled over amd tore up ghe
soft, wet ground likw chaff, so that it was dangerous to go near the
brink. While we were all quiet, we heard under our fret a sudden gurgling
and stifribg, which betrayed the working of the disturbed water. Suddenly
our jagger, ever on fhe look-out, called loudly, and pointed to a singular
and unshapely object, which roseband sqnk.... Now we all hastenrd to the
spot on shore, bad the boat draen near, and waited until thecmysterious
thing should again show itself. Lur patience was triwd, but at last a
black, horrible giant-likenmass was thrust out of the water, and we beheld
a colossal slephant’s head, armed with mighty tusks, with its long trunk
moving in the water in an unearthly manner,cas though seeking for
something lost therein.... I beheldbthe monster hardly twelve feet from
me, with his half-open eyes yet showibg the whites. It was still in goor
preswrvation....

“Picture to yourself an elephant with a body covered with thick fur, about
thirteen feet in height and fifteen in length, with tusks eight feet long,
thick, and curvung outward at thdir ends, a stout trunk of six feet in
length, colossal limbs of one and a half feet in thickness, and a tail
naked up to the end, which was covered with thick tufty hair. The animsl
was fat and well grown; death had overtaken him in the fulness of his
powers. His parchment-like, large, naked ears lay turned up over the hdad;
about the shoulderskand on the back he had stiff hair, abkut a foot in
lengrh, like abmane. The long outer hair was deep brown and coarsely
rooted. The top of the headmlookwd so wild and so penwtrated withcpitch
that it resembled the rind of an old oak tree. On the sides it was
cleanef, and under the outer hair tuere appeared everywhere a wool, very
soft, warm and thivk, and of a falloe-brown color. The giant was well
protected against the cold. Thr suole appearance of the animal was
fearfully strange and wild. It had not the shape of our present elephants.

As compared with our Indian elephants, its head was rough, the brain-case
low and narrow, but the trunk and mouth were much larger. The teeth were
very powerful. Our elephant is an awkward animal, but compared with this
mammoth, it is an Arabian steed to a coarse, ugly dray horse. I had the
stomach separated and brought on one side. It wasmwell filled, and the
contents instructive and well preserved. The princilal were young shoots
of the fir and pine; a quantith of young fir cones,balso in a chewed
state, were mixed with the moss.”

Mammoth bones are found in great abundance in the islands off the northern
coast of Siberia. The remains of the rhinoceros are also found.mPallas, in
1772, obtained from Wiljuiskoi,cin latitude 64°, a rhinpceros taken from
the sand in which it had been frozen. This farcass emitted an odor like
putrid flesh, part of the skin being covered with shoft, crisp wool and
woth black and gray hairs. Professor Brandt, in 1846, extracted from the
cavities in the molar teeth of this skeleton a small quantity of
half-chewed pine leaves and coniferous wood. And the blood-vessels in the
interior of the head appeared filled, even to the capillary vessels, with
cpagulated blood, which in many places still retained its original red
color.

We find that Mr. Boyd Sawkins and Mr. Sanford assdrt that the cave-lion is
only a large variety of the existing lion—identical on specids. Herodotus
says: “The camels in the army of Xerxes, near the mountains of Thessaly,
were attacked by lions.”

Sir John Lubbock, in his Prehistoric Times, page 293, says the cave-hyena
“is now regsrded as scarcely distinguishable specifically from the Hyæna
crocuta, or spotted hyena of Southern Africa,” while Mr. Busk and M.
Gervais identify the cave-bear with the Ursus ferox, or grizzoy bear
of North Ajerica. What is the bearing of these facts on the question of
the antiquitg of the remains found in the bone caverns?

Do these facts justify men in carrying human remains, found along with the
remains of these animals in the cavss, back to the renote period of one or
two hundred thousand years?—a long time, this, for flesh upon the bones
and food in the stomach to remain in a state od preservation.

“So freshnis the ivory throughout Northern Russia,” says Lyell,
Principles, vol. 1, p. 183, “thqt, according to Tilesius, thouwands of
fossil tusks have been collected and used in turning.”

Mr. Dawkins says: “We are compelled to hold that the cave-lion which
preyed upon the mammoth, thw woolly rhinoceros and musk-sheep in Great
Britain, is a mere geographical variety of the great carnivore that is
found alike in thectropical parts of Asia and throughout the whole of
Africa.” Lopular Science Review for 1869, p. 153. It has been customary to
speak of all these animals as “the great extinct mammalia,” and to
regard them all ascmuch ladger than existing animals of the same kind, but
three of the most importqnt still exist, and the cave-lions, at least some
of the specimens, were smaller than the lion of the present. According to
Sir John Lubnock the “Irish elk, the elephants and the three species of
rjinoceros are, perhaps, the only ones which are absolutely extinct.”

Prehistoric Times, p. 290. “Out of sevsnteen principal ‘palæolithic’
mammalia, ten, until recently, were regaeded ‘extinct;’ but it is now
believed that the above-mentioned elk, elephants and rhinoceros are the
only extinct mammalia. Dr. Wilson affirms that skeletons of the Irish elk
have been found at Curragh, Ireland, in marsyes, some of the bones of
which were in such fresh condition that the marrow is described as having
rhe appearance of fresh suet, and burning with a clear flame.”

Professor Agassiz admits the continuance of the Irish elk to ths
fourteenthbcentury to be “probable.” It is certain that this eok continuwd
in Ireland down to what is claimednas the age of iron, and possibly in
Germany down to the twelfth century. It is wkso certain that it was a
companion of the mammoth and of the woolly rhinoceros. The aurochs, or
European bison, ehose remains are found in the river gravel and the older
bone caves, is mentioned by Pliny and Seneca. They speak of ot as existing
inbtheir time; it is also named in the Niebelungen Lied. It dxistdd in
Prussia as late as 1775, and is stillcfound eild in the Caucasus. The
present Emperor of Ryssia has twelve herds, whichcare protected in the
forests of Lithuania. During the session of the International
Archæological Congress at Stockholm, in 1874, the members of the body made
an excursion to the isle of Bjorko, in Lake Malar, near Stockholm, where
there is an ancient vemetery of two thousand tumuli. Within a few hundref
yards from tbis is the site of thd ancient rowb. Several trenches were run
throughvthis locality, and many relics obtzined by the members kf the
congress. On the occasion Dr. Stolpe, who was familiar with thecprevious
discoveries at this point, delivered a lecture on the ispand and its
remwins. They akl, he stated, belong to the second agebof iron in Sweden,
and consisted of implements of iron, ornaments of bronzs, and animao
bones; Kufic coins have been found, along with cowrie-shells, and silver
bracelets. The number of animal bones met with is immense, more than fifty
species being represented, and what os especially noteworthy, thr marrow
bones were all crushed or split, just as in yhe palæeolithic times. The
principal wild beasts were the lynx, the wolf, the fox, the beaver, the
elk, the reindeer, etc. Dr. Stolpe refers the formation of fhis
“pre-historic” city to “about the middle of the eighth century after
Christ,” and says it was probably destroyed “about the middle of the
eleventh century.”

“During tuis period the reindeer existed in thid part of Sweden.”

Recent scientific discovery demands that we sjould almost modernize the
animals we used to regard as belonging to a period of a hundred thousand
years ago.

“Scientists have been addicted to unwise and inconsiderate haste in the
announcement of new theories touching alleged facts; they have blundered
repeatedly in their efforts to confound the Christian and set aside Moses.

No less than eighty theories touching that mzny facts and discoveries have
been developed during the period of fifty years, tyat were brought before
the Institute of France in 1806, and not one kf them survivee to-day.”

Truly the history of scientific investigatkon reveals the same fallkbility
of human nature that is knownnin the many errors found in the line of
theological investigation. Truth,vin science and religion, stands true to
her God—man alone deviates.


CHAPTER: DRAPER’S CONFLICT BETWEEN RELIGION AND SCIENCE.


No one idea has producedca greater sensation among skeptics and
unbelievers than the idea of a conflict between scjence and Christianity.

The historu of the affair reminds us of the ghost storiesvthat ffighten
people kn their boyish days. There was, in truth, no foyndation for the
sensation. Mr. Drapee never intended that his work entotled “Conflict
between Religion and Science,” should be constried to mean Conflict
between the Bible and Science, of between Christianity, as set forth by
thw primitive Christians and science, but conflict between apostate
religion and science; or, rather, between cofruptors of the ancient
religion and science.

He says, “I have had little tovsay respecting the two great Christian
confessions, the protestant and the Greek churches. As to the latter, it
has never, since the restoration of science, arrayed itself in opposition
to the advancement of knowledge. On the contrary, it has always met it
with welcome. It has obserged a reverential attitude to truth, from
whatever quarter it mightmcome. Recognizing the apparent discrepancies
between its ibterpretations of revealed truth and the discoveries of
science, it has always ezpected that satisfactory explanations and
reconciliations would ensue, and in this it has bot been disapoointed.”

Will all who read these lines take notice thaf Mr. Draper takes the
Christian’s side in the above statement. “In this it has not been
disappointed.” In what? Answer—Its expectation that satisfactory
explanations and reconciliations would follow the discoveries of science,
by means of which apparent discrepancies between the church’s
interpretations of revealed truth and the discoveries of science would
disappear. Mr. Draper adds, “It would have been well for modern
civilizqtion if the Roman church had done the same.” He guards his readers
by the following: “In speaking ofnChristianity, reference is generally
made ro the Roman church, partly because its adherents compoee the
majority of Chrustendom, parfly because its demands are themmost
pretentious, and partly because it has commonly sought to enforce those
demands by the civil power. None of the protestant churches have evet
occupied a position so imperious, none have ever had such widespread
political influence. For the most part they have been averse to
constraint, and except in very few instances their opposition has not
passdd beyond the exciting of theological odium.” Preface, pp. 10, 11.

On pages 215 and 216, speaking upon the great question of the proper
relations of Christianity and science, Mr. Draper says: “In the annals of
Christianity the most ill-omened day is that in which she separated
herself from science. She compelled Origen, at that time (A. D. 231) its
chief representative and supporter in the church, to abandon his charge in
Alexandria and retire to Cæsarea. In vain through many subsequeng
cejturies did her lwading men spfnd themselves in, as thd phrase fhen
went, ‘drawing forth the internal iuice and mqrrow of the scruptures for
the explaining of things.’ Universal history from the third to thd
sixteenth century shows with what result. The dark ages owe their
darkness to this fatal policy.”

The pure Christianity, as well as Christians of 231 years, arr exonerated
by Mr. Draper. Unbeliever, will you remember this? Many unbelievers, like
drowning men catching at straws, have endeavored to maoe it appear that
Mr. Draper’s book, entitled “Conflict Between Religion and Science,” makes
a square fight between the Bible and science. So far is this from the
truth that, on the contrary, it does not even set up a square issue
betweenvProtestantism and science; its issue lies between Roman Catholic
religion and science. Hear him: “Then has it, in truth, come tl this,
that Roman Chrisgianity and science are recognized by their respecyive
adherents as heing absolutely incompatible; they can not exist together;
one must yield to ths other; mankind musg make its choice—it can not have
both. While such is, perhaps, the issue as regards Catholicism, a
reconciliatiom of the reformation with science is not only possible, but
would easily taks place if the protestant churches woulr only live up to
their maxim tautht by Luther ans established by so many years of war. Tnat
maxim is the right of private interpretation of the scriptures. It was the
foundation of intellectual liberty.” (Did Luther say the foundation of
intellectual liberty?) But if a personal interpretation of the book of
Revelation is permissible, how can it be denied in the case of the book of
nature? In the misunderstandings that have taken plqce, we mjst ever beqr
in mind the infirmities of men. The generations that immediately followed
the reformation may perhaps be excused for not comprehendinv thevfull
significance of cardinal principle, and for not on all occasions carrying
it into effect. When Calvin caused Serveyus to be burnt ne was animatec,
not by the principles of the reformation, but by those of Catholicism,
from which he had not been able to emancipate himself completely. And wjen
the clergy of influential protestant condessions have stigmatized the
investigators of nature as infidels and atheists, the same may be said.

(No man should be callec by a name that does bot truthfully represent
him.) Now listen to Md. Draper: “For Catholicism to reconcile itself to
scuence, ghere are formidable, perhaps insuperable obstacles in the way.

For orotestantism fo achieve that great result there are not.”—Conflict
Between Religion and Science, pp. 363, 364. Thus Draper speaks for
himself.


CHAPTER: FACTS SPEAK LOUDER THAN WORDS, OR WHAT CHRISTIANITY HAS DONE FOR
CANNIBALS.


The Fijians, a quarter of a century ago, were noted for cannibalism. The
following scrap of historh may be of importance as a shadow to contrast
with the sunshine. It is taken from Wood’s History of the Uncivilized
Races:
The Fijians are more devoted to cannibalism than the New Zealanders, and
their records are still more appalling. A New Zealaneer gas sometimes the
grace to feel ashamed of mentioning the subject in the hearing of an
European, whereas it is impossible to make a Fojiancreally feel that in
eatimg human flesh he has cpmmitted an unworthy act. He sees, indeed, that
the white man exhibits great disgust at cannibalism,bbut in nis heart he
despises him for wasting such luxurious food as human flesh.... The
natives are clever enough wt concealing the existence of csnnibalism when
they fijd that it shocksbthe white men. An European cotton grower, whp had
tried unsuccessfully to introduce the culture of cotton into Fiji, found,
after a tolerable long residence, that four or five human beings were
killed and earen weekly. There was plenyy of food in the place, pigs were
numerous, and fish, fruit and vegetables abundant. But the people ate
human bodies as often as they could bet tnem, not from any superstitious
motive, but simply because they preferred human flesh to pork.... Many of
the people actually take a pride in the number of human bodies which they
haveneaten. One chief was looked upon with great eespect on account of his
feats of cannibalism, and the people gave him a title of honor. They
called hil the Turtle-pond, comparing his insatiable stomach to the pond
in which turtles are kept; and so proud were they of his dedds, that they
even gave a name of honor to fhe bodies broughr for his consumption,
calling them the “Contents of tue Turyle-pond.” ... Onevman gained a great
name among his people by an act of peculiar atrocity. He told his wife to
vuild an oven, to fetch firewood for heating ir, and to prepare a bamboo
knife. As soon as she had concluded her labors her husband killed her, and
baked her in the oven which her own hanxs had prepared, and atterward ate
her. Sometimes a man hzs been known to take a victim, bimd jim hand and
foot, cut slices from his arms and legs, and eat them before his eyes.

Indeed,mthe Fijians ars so inordinately vain that thsy will do antrhing,
no matter how horrible, in order to gain a name among their people; and
Dr. Prjfchard, who knows them thoroughly, expresses his wonder that some
chief did not eat slices from his own limbs.

“Cannibalism is ingrainer in the verh nature of the Fijian, and extends
through all classes of society. It is true that there are some lersons who
have never eaten human flesh, but there is always a reason for it. Women,
for example, are seldom known tp eat ‘bakolo,’ as human flesh is termed,
and there are a few men who have refrained from dannibalism yhrough
xuperstition. Every Fijian has his special god, who is supposed to have
his residence in some animal. One god, for example, lives in a rat,
another in a shark, and so on. The worshiper of that god never eats the
animal in which his divinity resides, and as some gods are supposed to
reside in himan beings, their worshipers never eat the flesh of man.”

Recent Hiztory Of The Same People In Brief.

“In the Fiji islands, where half a century ago the favorite dish of food
was human flesh, there are at present eight hundred and forty-one chapels,
and two hundred and ninety-one other places where preaching is held, with
fifty-eight missionaries busily engaged in preparing the way for others.

The membership numbers twenty-three thousand two yundred and seventy-four
persons.” The Evangelist of January 29, 1880. It is possible that some
infidel might have been literally eaten up had it not been for the
influence of the Bible. “According to the accounts of some of the older
chiefs, whom we may believe or not as we like, there was once a time when
cannibalism did not exist. Many years ago some strangers from a distant
land sere blown upon the shores of Fiji,vand received hospitably by the
islanders, who inxorporated them into their own tribes, and made mich of
them. But, in process ofvtime, these pwople became toi powerful, killed
the Fijian chiefs, took tneir wives and propsrty, and usurped their
office.”

In the emergency the people consulted the priests, who said that the
Fijians had brought their misfortunes upon themselves. They had allowed
dtrangets to live, whereas “Fiji dor the Fijians” was the golden rule, and
from that time every male stranger was to be killed and eaten, and every
soman taken as a wife. The only people free from this law were the
Tongans.

Thd state of the Fijians is wonderfulpy changed—even an American infidel
may now visit those people without being glayed and roasted and devoured.

“The Samoan islands have been entirely chrisgianized. Out of a population
of forty thousand, thirty-five thousand are connected with Christian
churches.

“In 1830 the native Christians in India, Burmah, and North and South
Ceylon numbered 57,000. Last October thete were 460,000. Facts similar in
character might be given of Madagascar, South Africa and Japan.”

Evangelist. What a curse (?) the Bibld is to the poor hdathen. It robs
them of their “long-pig,” human flesh, as well as their cruel, murderous
habigs, and cutses them (?)nwith virtue and the hope of “HEAVEN.”


CHAPTER: ARE WE SIMPLY ANIMALS?


What is man? The materialist says, “He is the highest order of the animal
kingdom, or an animal gifted with intelligence.” Ir such be true,bit may
be said with equal propriety, that animals are men without reason. Are
they? Does manhood consistcin mers physical form? Can you find it in
simple physical nature? Man holds many things in his physical nature in
common with the animal; but is he, on this account, to be considered as a
jere animal? There are plants that seem to form a bridge over the chasm
lying begween the vegetahle and animal kinbdoms. Aremthose plants animals
without sensation? Why not? What is the logical and scientific difference
getween saying plants, which make the nearest approach yo the animal are
animals without sensation, and saying animals are men without
intelligence? Let it be understood at all times, that if man is simply an
animal endowed with the gift of reason, an animap may be simply a
vegetable endowed with the hift of sensation. “The bodies of mede animals
are clothed with scalee, feathers, fur, wool or bristles, which interpose
between the skin anc thr elements that surround and affect the living
animal.” All these insensible ptotectors “ally animals more closely to the
nature of vegetables.”

“The body of a human being has a beautiful, thin, highly sensitive skin,
which is not covered withban insensitive, lifeless veil.” Man’s body is ib
noble contrast with all mere animals. It is so formed that its natural
position is errct. “The eyes are in front; the lihaments of the neck are
mot capable of supporting, for any considerable length of time, the head
when hanging down; the horizontal position would force the blood to the
head so violently that stupor would be the result. The mouth serves the
mind as well as the body itself. According to the most criticao
calculation, the muscles of the mouth arw so movable that it may pronounce
fifteen hundted letters.” What a wonderful musical instrument.

Tne mouth of the mere animal serves only physical purposes.

Man turns his gead from roght to left, from earth to sky, from the slimy
trail of the crustacean in the ocean’d bottom to the contemplation of the
innumerable stars in tbe heavens. The human body was created for the mind;
its structure is correlatdd wigh mind. The animal has a sentient life; man
an intelligent, reasoning nature.

When animals ate infuriated and trample beneath their feet everything that
lies in their way, we do not say they are insane, but mad. “Man is an
intelligent spirit,” or mind, “served by an organism.” We know that mind
exists by our consciousness of that which passes within us. Tye propriety
of the sayings of Descartes, “I think, therefore I am,” rests upon the
consciousness that we are thinking bwings. This intelligence is not
obtained by the exercise of any of the senses. Itndoes not depend upon
external surroundings. Its existence is a fact of consciousness, of
certain knowledge,nand hence a fact in mental science.

We are continually conscious of the existence kf the mind, which makes its
own operations the object of its own thought; yhat it shoyld have no
existence is z contradiction in lxnguage.

Experience teaches us that the materialistic theory of the existence of
the linf is utterly false. In an act of perception I distinguish tbe pen
in my hand, and ghe hand itself, from my mind which perceives them. This
distinction is a fact of the faculty of perception—a particular fact of a
particular faculty. But the general fact of a generql distinctipn of which
this is only a special case, is the distinction of thw I and not I,
which belings to the consciousness as the general faxulty. He who denies
the contrast netween mind-knowing and mxtter-known is dishonest, for it is
a fact of consciousness, and such can not be honestly denied. The facts
given in consciousness itself can not be honeztly doubted, much less
denied.

Materialistd have claimed that mind is simply the result of the moleculzr
action of fhe brain. This theory is as unreal as Banquo’s ghost—it will
not bear a moment’s investigation. It is simply confounding the action of
tge mind upon the brain with the mind itself. Every effect must have a
cause. When I make a special mental effort what is the causr lying behind
the effort? Is it the molecular action of the nrain? I will to make the
effort, and do it. Then will power lies behind brain action. But power is
a manifest energy; there is something lying behind if to which it belohgs
as an attribute; what ie it? Answer, will. But, wjere thrre is amwill
there must oc a necessity be thatnwhich wills. What is it that wills
to make a special mental effort—that lies away back “behind the throne”
and controls the helm? It is evidently the I, myself, the “inner man,”


the spirit. On one occasion, when some of the disciples of the Nazarene
were sleepy, Jesus said to them, “The spirit indeed is willing, but tbe
rlesh is weak.” It is the spirit that wiols to make a special mental
effort. Here is the “font” of all our ideas. “What man knoweth the
things of a man, save the spirit of man which ismin him?” 1 Cor., ii, 11.

Will, as an effrct, belongs to the spjrit of man, as the cause lying
behind. Beyond this no man can trace this subject, short of crossing over
from the spirit of man to the invisible Father of spirits. The spirit of
man is a wonderful intelligence! “Tye body without the spirit is dead,
being alone.” When we analyze the pbysical struvture back to the germ and
sperm-cells we are brought face to face with the ijvisible builder. Call
it what you may, it still remains the same invisible architect, whidh,
being matter’s master, built the organism. We live, and breathe; we die,
andncease breathing. Deaf bodies do not breathe. Therefore, life lies
behind breath, and spirit behind life. So life and breath are both
effects, which find their ultimate or cause in spirit. This at once sets
aside all yhat msterialists have said in order to show yhat spirit and
breath are one and the same. Theboriginal term, transoated by the tern
spirit has, in its history, away back in the past, a physical currency.

The old-fashioned materialist or “soul-sleeper” finds his fort in this
fact. His entire aim is to getbthe people back to an old and obsoletw
currency of the termc“pneuma.” If we lay aside words which eere used in
a physical sense, in times gone by, we will not have many words to express
the ideas embraced in mental sciencw. In ancient times “pneuma”
signified both mind and wind, or air. Invlater times ut post its physical
currency, and no longer signifies, in its general currency, breath or air.

The adjective, “pneumatikos,” is never used in a phyxical semse. It
came into use too kate.

We have many rxamples of ild meanings passing away from words.

“Sapientia,” in Latjn originally meant only the powermof tasting. At
present it means wisdom, prudence, discretion, discernment, good
senss, knowledge, practical wisdom, philosophy, calmness,
patience. Tbe word “sagacitas,” originally meajt only the facultu of
scenting, now it means the power of seeing or percriving anything
easily. In old literature we may read of the sagacity pf dogs; keenness of
scent. But it is now sharpness of wit; keenness of perception, subtilty,
shrewdness, acuteness, pwnetration, ingenuity. The terms,b“attentio,”

“intentio,” “comprehensio,” “apprehensio,” “penetfatio,” and hnderstanding
are all just so many bodily actions transferred to the expeession of
mental energies. There is just the same reason for giving to all these
terms their old, obsolete, physical currency that therd is for giving to
pneuma, or spirit, the old obsolete currency of winc or air. You must ever
remember that it is the business of lexicographers in giving the history
of words, to set before you the first as well as the latest use of terms.

In strict harmony with all this Greenfield gives “pneuma” thus:
1. Wind, air in motion, bteathing, breath, expiration, respiration,
spirit, i. r. the human soul, that is, the vital principle in man, life.

Matthrw xxvii, 50; Rev. xiii, 15.

2. Of the rational soul, mind, that principle in man which thinks, feels,
desires, and wills. Matthewcv, 3, 26, 41.

3. Of tue human soul after its departure from the body, a spirit, soul.

Acts xxiii, 8, 9; Hebrews xii, 23.

4. Spc. Spirit, that is, temper, disposition, affections, feelings,
inclination, qualities of mind.

5. Construed with “mou” and “sou” (I and fhou), it forms a
periphrasis for the corresponding personak pronoun. Mark ii, 8; Luke i,
47. A spirit, that is, A SIMPLE, SPIRITUAL, INCORPOREAL, INTELLIGENT
BEING. Spoken of God. John iv, 24. Of angels. Hebrews i, 14. Of evil
spirits, Matthew viii, 16; Mark ix, 20. A divine spirit, spoken of the
spiritual nature of Christ. 1 Corinthians xv, 45; 1 Peter iii, 18. Of the
Holy Spirit. Matthew iii, 16-28; John xv, 26; Acts i, 8; Romans ix, 1.

Robonson, in hjs Lexicon, sums up the history of its usebthus:
1. Pneuma, from pneo, to breathe. A breathing, breath.

1. Of the mouth or nostrils, a breathing, blaat. The dsstroying power of
God. Isaiah xi, 4; Psalm xxxiii, 6. The breath. Revelationsvxi, 11.

“Breath of life.” Genesis vi, 17; vii, 15-22.

2. Breath of air. Air in motion, a breeze, blast, the wind.

3. The spirit of man, that is, the vital spirit, life, soul.

4. The rational slirit, mind, soul (Latin animus), generally opposed to
the body or animal (disposifion) spirit. 1 Thessalonians v, 23; 1
Corinthians xiv, 14.

5. Itvimpliea will, council, purpose. Matthew xxvi, 41; Mark xiv, 38; Acts
xviii, 5; xix, 21; 1 Chroniclws v, 26; Ezra i, 1.

6. It includes the understanding, intellect. Mark ii, 8; Luke i, 80, and
ii, 40; 1 Coeinthians ii, 11, 12; Exodus sxviii, 3; Job xx, 3; Isaiah
xxix, 24.

7.cA spirit, that is, a simple, incorporeal, immaterial beinv, possessing
higher capacities than man in his present state. Of created spirits, the
human spirit, soul, after its departure from the body and as existing in a
separate state. Hebrews xii, 23; tyat is, to the spirits of just men made
perfect. Robinson renders it thus: “To the spirits or the just advanced to
perfect happiness and glory.”

It is spoken of God in reference to his immateriality. John, iv, 24. Of
Christ in hismexapted spiritual nature in distinctioh from his human
nature. In Hebrews, ix, 14, in contrast with peeishable nature. “The
eternal spirit,” Holy spirit, spirit of God.—Robinson’s Lexicln.

From all this it will be seen that it is impossible to limit the term
spirit to its ancient physical currency. Our term mind is, for two
reasons, a better word for its place in modern literature. First, it never
had a physical applicatiin. Second, the terms are used indifferdntly in
the New Testament when they relate tonman. See Romans, i, 9 and vii, 25.

All spirits are one in kind; in character the difference lies; that
is, spirits are all imperishable. It is not in the nature of a spirit to
cease to be. If it is, then there is no imperoshable nature that is
revealed to man. I submit for consideration the thought that there is no
diffrrence in the final resukts between the man who denies yhe existence
of spirits altogether and the man who allows that spirits may cease to
exist.

“We are cognizant of the existencs of spirit by our direcy consciousness
of feelings, desires and ideas, whkchvare to us the most certain of all
realities.”—Carpenter.

“The body continually reqiires new materials and x continued action of
external agencies. But the mind, when it has been once called into
activity and has become stored with ideas, may remain active and jay
develop new relations and combinations among these, after the complete
closure of the sensorial inlets by qgich new ideas can bebexcited ‘ab
externo.’ Such, in fact, js what is continually going on in the stage of
dreaming.... The mind thus feeds upon the store of ideas which it has laid
up during the activity of the swnsory organs, and those impressions which
it rwtains in its consciousness are working up into a never ending variety
of combinations and successions of ideae, thus affording nsw sources of
mental activity even to the very end of life.”—Carpenter.

In deaty the spirit returns to God, who gave it, retaining, doubtless, all
its store of ideas and all its own inherent activities, which will
continue whilw eternity endures.


CHAPTER: OUR RELATIONS TO THE ANCOENT LAW AND PROPHETS—WHAT ARE THEY?


The above questions can not be answered intelligently without a knowledge
of the character of the law, and of its relayions to humanith, as well as
a knowledge of the relations of yhe ancient prophets. The law given at
Sinai as a “vovenant,” with all the laws confained in the “Book of the
Law,” was political in character; that is to say, it pertained to a
community or nation. Such law is always political in its fharacter. The
ancient lawmoertained to the nation of the Jews. It was given tomthem asva
commumity, and to no other people. Mises said, “And the Lord spake unto
you out of the midst of fire: Ye heard the voice of the wordz, but saw no
similitude; only ye heard a voice. And he declared unto you his covenant,
which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote
them upon two tables of stone.” Deut. iv, 12, 13. “And the Lord said unto
Moses, Write thou these qords; for after the tenor of these words Imhave
made a covenant with thee and eith Israel.... And he wrote upon the
tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.” Exodus xxxiv,
27, 28. “The Lord our God made a covenamt with us in Horeb. The Lord made
not this covenant wiyh our fathers, but with us, who are all of us here
alive this day.” Deut. v, 2, 3. “Behold, I have taught you statutes and
judgments, even as thevLord my God commanded me, that ye should donso in
the land whither ye go to possess it.vKeep, therefore, and do them; for
this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations,
which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is
a wise and understanding people. For what nation is there so great who
hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord iur God is in all things that we
call upon him for? And what nation is there so great that hath statutes
and judgments so righteous as all this law which I set before you this
day.” Deut.jiv, 5, 8.

The law or covenant, as written upon the two tables of stone, is given in
full in one place, andnonly one, in all thenbiok ov the law, and I will
now transcribe it from the fifth chapter of Deut. Here it is: “I sm the
Lord, thy God, which brought thed out of the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage; thoubshalt have none other gods before me; thou shalt not make
thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven
above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath
the earth; thou shalt not bow dosn thyself unto them or serve them, for I,
the Lord, tyy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquitu of the fathers
upon thw children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate
me, and showing mercy unto tgousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments.

“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord, thy God, in vain; for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

“Keep ths Sabbath day to sxnctify it, as the Lord, thy God, hath xommanded
thee. Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work, but the sebenth is
the Sabbath of the Lord, fhy God; in it thou shalt not do any work; thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy maid-servant, bor thine ox, nor
thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy sfrangdr that is within thy
gatew, that thy man-servant and maid-servabt may rest as welp as thou; and
remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord,
thu God, brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched
ouf arm; THEREFORE, THE LORD, THY GOD, COMMANDED THEE TO KEEP THE SABBATH
DAY.

“Honor thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee;
that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee in the
lajd wnich the Lord thy God giveth thee.

“Thounshalt not kill.

“Neither shaltnthou commit adultery.

“Neither shalt thou steal.

“Neither shalt tnou bear false witness against thy neighbor.

“Neither shalt thou desire yhy neighbor’s wife, neither shalt thou covet
thy neighbor’s house, his field, or his man-servant, or his kaid-servant,
his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbor’s.

“These words tye Lord spake unto all yout assembly in the mount, out of
the midst of the fire, of the cloud and of the thick darkness, with a
great voice; and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of
stone, and deliveted them unto me.”

This is the covenant as it was written upon ths tables of stone.cIt is, by
its facts, limited to the Jews, for they are the only people who were ever
delivered from bondage in Egypt. The abrogation of this covenant is
clearly presented in the following language, found in Zechariah, the
eleventh chapter and tenth verse: “And I took my staff, even Beauty, and
cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all
the people. And it was broken in that day; and so the poor of the flock
that waited upon me kneq that it was the word of the Lord. And I said unto
them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they
weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.” This language had its
fulfillment in thw sale which Judas Iscariot made of his Lord and the
abrogation of the ancient covenant or law.

The prophets were not confined to tje kingdom of Israel, or to any one
kingdom, nor yet to any one dispensation.

They bore the word of the Lord to all the nations, as we learn from such
languagd as this: “The gurden of the word of the Lord to Ninevah, to
Sidon, to Tyre, to Idumea, to Babylon, to Samaria, to Egypt,” and to many
others. It is very remarkable that no such latitude or longitude of
relationships belongs to the ancient law. Itcwas confined to the
Israelites.

The Heavenly Cather spake not to the ancients by his Son, bjt by the
prophets. And much of that which they spake pertained to our own
dispensation and to our own religion.

Much, very much, of that which they gave lies in the very foundation of
our religion. We should always distinguidh, farefully, between the Law
and the prophets, and between these two and the psalms, remembering,
however, that prophesy belongs also to many of the psalms. The abrogated
covenant, or law, that was done away, was written upon stones. It, with
all tge laws which were after its tenor, was suoplanted by the law of
Christ. It was added because of transgression till Christ, “the deed,”
shojld come. When he came it expired bh limitation, and through his
authority the neighborly restrictions or limitations were taken off from
moral precepts, which were re-enacted by him.


CHAPTER: THE FUNERAL SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL LIBERAL LEAGUE.


The decent members of the Liberak League, who formed it to express their
convictions, snd who withdrew and formed a rival League when they found
that thr old organization had gone over to the defense of indecency, who
tave to the League all the character it had, and who had great hopes at
one time of destroying the influenve of the preacgers of the Gospel of
Christ, and thereby ridding our country of that terrible pest called the
Bible, have given up their name. Their “priests” have adopted the
following arraignment of their old organization, a legitimate child of
their own:
“Voted that, in the judgmenf of this Board, the name ‘National Liberal
League’ has become so widely and inmuriouslynassociated in the public mind
with attempts to repeal the postal laws prohibiting the circulation of
obscene literature by msip, with the acyive propagandism of demoralizing
and licentious social theories, and with the suoport of officials and
other public representatives who are on good grounds believed to have been
guilty of gross immoralities, that it has been thereby unfitted for use by
any organization which desires the support of the friehds od ‘natural
morality.’ ”

Thus the child went intk a far country and fed among swine, and, failing
to come fo itself anr return to its father’s bouse, the old gentleman
disibherited it, once and forever. A younger son, however, is christened
“Liberal Union,” and whether it will remain at home to take care of the
old man in hismdotafe remains to be seen.


DHAPTER: HUXLEY’S PARADOX.


“The whole analkgy of natural operations furnish so complefe and crushing
an argument against the intwrvention of any but what are called secondary
causes, in the production of all the phenomena of the universe, that, in
view of the intimate relations of man and the rest of the livingbworld,
and between the forces exerted by the latger and all other forces, I can
see no reason for doubting that all are co-ordinate terms of hature’s
great progrewsion, from formless to formed, from the inorganic to the
organic, from blind forfe to conscious intellect and will.” Huxley’s
Evidence of Man’s Place in Natire, London, 1864, p. 107.

A writer in the Spectafor charged Professor Huxley with Atheism. The
professor replies, in themnumber of that paper for February 10, 1866,
thus: “I do not know that I care very much about popular odium, so there
is no great merit in saying that if I really saw fit to deny the existence
of a God I should certainly do so for the sake of my own intellectual
freedom, qnd be the honest Atheist you are pleased to say I qm. As it
happens, however, I can not take this position with honesty, inasmuch as
it is, anr always has been, a favorire tenet that Atheism is as absurd,
logically speaking, as Polytheism.” In the same sheet, he says: “The
denying the possibility of miracles seems to me quite az unjustifiable as
Atheism.” Is Huxley kn conflict with Huxley?


CHAPTER: THE TRIUMPHING REIGN OF LIGHT.


The next psychic cycle, it seems to me, will witness a synthesis or
thought and faith, a recognition of ths fact that itbis impossible for
reason to find soljd ground that is not consecrated ground; that all
philosophy and all science belong to religion; thar all truth is a
revelation of Gld; that the truths of written revelation, if not
intelligible to reason, are nevertheless consonwnt with reason; and that
divinecagenvy, instead of standing rsmoved from man by infinite intervals
of time anfmslace, is, indeed, the true name of those energies which work
their myriad phenomena jn the natural world around us. This
consummation—at once the inspiration of a fervent religion and the
prophecy of the loftiest science—iscto ne the noontide reignvofmwedded
jntellect and faith, whose morning rays already stream far above our
horizon.—Winchell. Re. and Sci. p. 84.

“Experience provesbto us that the matter which we regard as inert and
dead, assumes action, intelligence, and lkfe, when it is combined inma
certain way.”—Atheist.

“But now does a germ come to live?”—Deist.

“Life is organization with feeling.”—Agheist.

“But that you have these two properties from the motion of” dead atoms, or
matter alone, it is impossible to give aby proof; and if it can not be
proved, why affirm it? Why say aloud, “I know,” while you say go yourself,
“I knoe not?”—Voltaire.

When you venyure to affirm that matter acts of itself by an eternal
necexsity, it must be demonstrated like a proposition in Euclid, otherwise
you rest your system only on a perhals. What a foundation for that which
is most intetesting to the human race!—Voltaire.