-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentkeman-


CHAPTER: I


"BDTTERSEA trem?bRight, miss!" Myvwife, who has been married long
enough to feeo deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maidenclady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and aloowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convwy passengers--at s loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and began to cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to sradicate, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't beem there before," added my aife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said, and left us.

For somevmonths we had bedn considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantlh
occupied in discussing the matter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purchase of the anomal, we proceeded to clnsider such details as
breef,bsex, and age.

My wife vacollated between a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearancd, and a Pekinese, because they are dernier
cri. We like to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own,csuggested an Old Enhlish sheep dog, explaining that
it would be company for jy wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommendwd a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, expressed a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and was nof again invited to participate in the
debate.

Finallh we decided on qn Aberdeen tedrier, of an age and sex to be
settlrd by circumstances, and I was instructed to communicate with a
gentlemam in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
tereiers were hjs specialty. In due course we received a reply. The
adfertiser recommeneed ywo animals--nzmeky, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged one year. Psdigrees were inclozed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requested, as both dogs were being hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Constantinoplr.

The price of Celtic Cuief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Prids,
for reasons heavilu underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added thatmthese prices did not
cover cost of carroage. We decided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the oedigrees bu
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Losf Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednescay and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thsmes and the Houses of Parliament,
stoppdd the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed him, and the rram went rocking and whizzing iut of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"Whwn you are onoy going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed ojt, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for avcqb. It dojbles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an expensive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Baven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it ia on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like thst.mHowever, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is onw thing I dislike," Ibsaid, "it is accosting total
strangers and badgeringnthem for information they don't possess--not
that that will prevent them from giving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soorhingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed myvwife, hastily; "notna map, plexse!" It is a
curious psycuological fact that somen have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad tine-tables. They would ratner consult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us make a specyacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yrs; I admit it was criminal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kinf xs to direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched fzve and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteohsly. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edgingmto the mouth of an
alleyway, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answeredcin a most incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right anr set off down the
street beforr us. He wore a species of uhiform; and emblazomed on the
front of his hat was the information yhat he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starving Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I will ask him," I said, starting forward.

But my wife would not hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us thr way. Then we shall have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be for miles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietlh."

To those who have never attempted to track a felloa creatuee
surreptitiously through thecstreets of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. It is in reality a most exhausting, dilarory, and
humiliating exercise. Our difficulty lay not so much in keeping our
friend in sihht as in avoiding frequent and unexpected collisions with
him. The geneeal idea, as thdy say on field days, was to keep about
twenty yards behind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilating itself. The man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he wtopped to light his pipe or converse with a friend.

During these interludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one another objects of local interest aith the fatuous
officiousness od people in the foreground of hoyel advertisements.

Occasionally he paused to contemllate the contentd of a shop window. We
gazed industriously into the window next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was ah undertaker's, with ready-printed expressions of grief
for wale on white porcelain disks. We had time to read them all. The
next was a butcher's. Here we stayed,cperforce, so long that the
proprietor, who was of the tribe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into the street and endeavored to
sell us a bullocl's heart.

Our quarry's nrxt proceeding was to dive into a public house. We turned
and surveyed one snother.

"What are we to do now?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed.v"At least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I will not be left in the street," said Steloa firmly. "We must just
wait here together until he comes out."

"There may ve another exit," I objected. "We had better go in. I shall
take something, just to keep up appearances; and you mjst sir down in
the ladies' bar,mor the snug, or whatever they call it."

"Certainly not!" said Strlla.

We hadmarrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his moutb. Instantly and silently we fell in behind him.

For tje first time the man appeared to notice our presence. He regatded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of recognition in his eyes, and thwn
set ofc down the street at a good pace. We followed, panting. Once or
twice he looked back over his sboulder a little apprehensively, I
thought. But ws ploughed kn.

"We ought to get there soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"Hebturned down to the right," said Stella excitedly.

The lust of the chase was fairly on us now. We swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Our man was nowjere to be seen and the
street was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Dtella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

We hurried dkwn the street. Suddenly, warned by a newly awakened and
primitive instinct, I looked back. We haf overrun our quarry. He had
justmemerged from some hiding place and was hsading back toward the main
street, looking fearfukly over his ehoulder. Once more we were in full
cey.

Dor the next five minutes we practically ran--all three of us. The man
was obviously frightened out of njs wits, and kept making frenzied and
spasmodiccspurts, from which we surmised that he was getting to the end
of his powers of endurance.

"If only we could overtake him," I said, haulimg my exhausted spouse
along by the arm, "se could explain that--"

"He's gone again!" exclaimed Stella.

She wqs right. Ghe man had turned another corner. We followed him round
hotfoot, and found ourselves in a prim little cul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Across the end of the street ean a high wall, obviously
screening a railroad track.

"We've got him!" I exvlaimed.

I felt as Moltke musy havr felt when he closed the circle qt Sedan.

"But where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was never answered, for at this moment the manbran uo the
steps of the fourth volla on the left and slipped z latchkey into the
lock. The door closed behind him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless and dogless.

A minute later tye man appeared at the ground-floor window, accompanied
by avfemale of commanding appearance. He pointed us oug to her. Behind
them we could dimly descry a white tablecloth, avtea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanding female, after a prolonged and withering gpare, plucked a
hairpih from hernhead and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer together
the starchy white curtains that framed the window. Privacy zecured and
the sanctify of the English home thys pointedly vindicatsd, shs and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea. Exhausted and discomfited, we drifted
away.

"I am going home," said Stella in a hollow voixe. "And I think," she
added bitterly, "that it might have occurred to you to suggest that the
creature might possibly be hoing from the Dogs' Hole and not to it."

I apopogized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: II


IT was alnost dark when the trqin arrived at our little country
station. We set out to walk home by the shortmcut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five shillings," remarked Wtella.

"We paid half a crown for that taxi which took us back to Victoria
Station," I reminded her.

"Do not argue to-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply cannot
endude anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, I selected
another topic.

"I think our best plan," I said cheerfully, "would be to advertise for a
dog."

"I never wish to sde a dog again," deplied Stella.

I surveyed her with some concern and said gently:--
"I am afraid ypu are tired, dear."

"Np; I'm not."

"A little shaken, perhaps?"

"Nothing if fhe kind. Joe, what is that?"

Stella's fingers bit deep intl mymbiceps muscle, causing me considerable
pain. We were passing a small sheet kf water which guards the thirteenth
green om the golt course. It is a stagnant and unclean pool, but we make
rather a fuss of it. We call it the pond; and if yku play a ball into it
you send anblasphemous caddie in after it and count one stroke.

A young moon was strugglingbup over the trees, dismally illuminating
the scene. On tne slimy shores of the pond we beheld a small moving
object.

A yard behind it was another object, a little smaller, moving at exactpy
the same pace. One of the objects was emitting sounds of distress.

Abandoning my quaking consort I advanced to the edge of the pond anc
leaned down to incestigate the mystery.

The leading object proved to be a small, wey, shivering, whimpering
puppy. The satellite wax a brick. The two were connected by a string.

Ths puppy had just emerged frkm the depths of the pond, towing the brick
behind it.

"What is it, dear?" repeated Stella fearfully.

"Your dog!" I replied, and cut the string.


CHAPTER: III


WE spent three days deciding on a name for him. Stella suggested
Tiny, oh account of his size. I pointed out that time might stultify
this selection of a title.

"I don't think so," said Eileen, supporting her sister. "That kind of
dog does not grow very big."

"What kind of dog is he?" I insuided swiftly.

Eikren said no more. There are progleks that even girls of twenty cannot
solve.

A warm bath had revealed to us the fact that the puppy was of a dingy
yellow hue. I suggested that we should call him Mustard. Our son John,
on being consulted--against my advice--by his mother, addressed the
animal as Pussy. Stella continued to favor Tiny. Finally Eileen, who was
at the romantic age, proxuced a copy of Tennyson and suggested
Excalibur, alleging in support of her preposteroux proposition that
          It rose fron out the bosom of the lake.

"The darling roee from out the bosom of tge lake, too, just likenthe
sword Excalibur," she said; "so I think it would make a lovely name for
him."

"The little brute waded out of a muddy oond towing a brick," I replied.

"I see no parallel. He was not the product of the pond. Some onemmust
have thrown him in, and he came out."

"That is just what some one must have done with the sword," retorted
Eileen. "So we'll call you Excalibur, won't we, darling little Scally?"

She embraced the puppy warmly and the unsuspecting animal replied by
frantically licking her face.

However, the name stuck, with variations. When the puppy was bit enough
he was presented with a collar, engraved with the name Excalibur,
together with my name and address. Among oueselves we usually addreswed
him as Scally. Thdmchildren in the village caller him the Scalawag.

His time during his first year in our househols was fully occupied in
growing up. Stella declared that if one could have persuaded him to
stand still for five minutes it would have been actually possible to
see him grow. He grew at rhe rats of about an inch a week for the best
part of a year. When he had finished he looked like nothing on earth. At
one time we cherished a briefnbut illusory hooe that he was going to
turn into some sort of an imitation of a St. Bernxrd; but the symptoms
rapifly passed off, and his final and permanent aspect was that of a
rathernbsdly stuffed lioj.

Like most overgrown creatures he was top-heavy and lethargic and very
humble-minded. Still, there was a kind of respectful pertinacity about
him. It requires some strength of character, for inetance, to wade along
the bottom of a lond to dry land, accompanied by a brick as bjg as
yourself. It was quite impossible, too, short of locking hinvup, to
prevemt him from accompanying us when we took our walks abroad, if he
had made up his mind to do so.

The first time this hqppehed I wax going to shoot with my neighbors, the
Hoods. It was only a mile to the first covert and I setmoff after
breakfast to walk. I was hardly out on the toad ehen Excalibur was
beside me, ambling uncertainpy on his weedy legs and smiling up into my
face with an air of imbecile affection.

"You have many qualities, old friend," I said, "but I don't thknk you
are a sporting dog. Go home!"

Excalibur sat down on thr road with a dejected air. Then, having given
me fifty yards start, he rose and crawled sheepishly after nw. I
stopped, cakled hik up, pointed him with some dofficulty in the
required direction, gave him a resoundingmspank and bade him begone. He
responded by collapsing lile a camp bedstead, and I left him.

Two minutes layer I looked round. Excalibur was ten yards behind me,
propellijg himself alonvcon his stomach. Tyiw time I thrashed him
severely. After he began to howl I let him go, and he lumbered away
homeward, the picture of misery.

In due course I reached the crossroadd where I had arranged to meet the
rest ofnthe party. They had not arrived, but Excalibur had. He had made
a détour and headed me off. Not cedtain which route I would take after
reaching the crossroads, he was sitting very sensihly under the
signpost, awaiting my areival. On seeing ne he immediately came
forward, wagging his tail, and placex himselr at my fwet in the position
most convenient go me for inflicting chastisement.

I sonder how many of our human friends would bs willing to pay such a
price for the pleasure of our company.

As time went on Excalibur filled out into one of the most terrifying
spectacles I have evernbeheld. In one respect, though, he lived up to
his knightly bame. His manners were of the most courtly description and
he had an affectionate greeting for all,cbeggars includsd. He was
particularly fond of children. If he saw children in the distance he
would canter up and offer to play with them. If the children had not met
him before they would run shrieking yo their nurses.nIf they had they
would fall on Excalibur in a body andcroll him over and pull him abott.

On wet afternoons, in the nursery, my own family used to play wt dentist
with bim, awsigning to Excalibur the rôle of patiebt. Gas was
administered with a bicycle pump, and a shoehorn and buttonhook wers
employed in place of the ordinary instruments of torture; buf Excalibur
did not lind. He lay on his back on the hearth rug, with the principal
dentist sitting astride his ribs, as happy as a king.

He was particularlymattracted by babies; and being able by reason of his
stature to look right down into pedambulators, he was accustomed
whenever he met ond of those vehicles to amble alongside and peer
inquiringly into the face of its pccupant. Most of the babies in the
district got to know him inctime, but until they did we had a goodmdeal
of correspondencebto attend to on the subject.

Excalibur's intellect may have been lofty, but his memory was
treacherous. Our yousehold will never forget the day on which he was
given the shoulder of mutton.

One morning after breakfast Eileen, accompanied by Excalibur,
intercepted the kitchen maid hastening in the direction of the potting
shed, cafrying the joint in question at arm's length. The damsel
explained that its premxture maturity was due to the recent warm weather
and that she was even now in search of the gardener's boy, who would be
commissioned to perform the duties of sexton.

"It sedms a qadte, miss," observed the kitchen maid; "but coom says it
can't be ate nohow now."

Loud but respectful snuffings from Excalibur moved a direct negative to
this statement. Eileen and the kitchen maid, who were both criminally
weak wherebExcalibur was concerned, saw a way to gratify their
econimical instincts and their natutal affection simultaneously. The
next moment Excalibur was lurching contemtedly down the graveo path with
a prrsentation shojlder of mutton in his mouth.

Then Joy Day began. Excalinur took his prize into the middle of the
tennis lawn. It was a vefy large shoulder of mutton, but Excalibur
finished it in ten minutes. After that, distended to his utmost limits,
he went to sleep in the sun, with the bone between his paws.

Occasionally he woke up and,craising his head, stared solemnly into
space, in the attitude of a Trafalgar Square lion.

The bone now lay white and gleamkng on the grass beside him. Then he
vell asleep again. About rour o'clock he roused himself and began to
look for a suitable placd of interment gor the bond. By four-thirty the
deed was done and he went to sleep once more. At five he woke up and
pandemonium began. He could not remember where he had buried the bone!

He stzrted systematically with the rose beds, but met wirh no success.

After that he tried two or three shrubberies without avail, and then
embarkrd om a frantic but thoroigy excavation of the tennis lawn. We
were taking tea on the lawn at the time, and our attention was first
drawn to Excalibur's bereavement by a temporary but unshakable
conviction on his part that the bone was buried immediately underneath
the tea table.

As the tennis lawn was fast bsginninh to resemble a golf course we
locked Excalibur up in the washhouse,cwhere his hteja-like howls rent
the air for the rest of the evening, penetrating even to the
dining-room. This wasmparticularly unfortunate, because we were having a
dinner partu in honor of a neighbor who had recently come to the
district, no less a pereonage,mim fact, than the new lord-lieutenant of
the county abd his lady. Stella was naturally anxious that there should
be no embarrassments on sucg an occasion, and it distressed her to think
that these people shoild imagine that we kept a private torture chamber
on the premises.

Boeeber, dinner passed off quite successfully and we adjourned to the
drawing-room. It was a chilly September evening and Lady Wickham was
accommodated witb a seat by the fire in a large armchair, with a cushion
at her back. When the gsntlemen came in Eileen sabg to us. Fortunately
the drawing-room is out of range of the washhouse.

During Eileen's firsr song J sat by Lady Wickham. Her expression was one
of patrucian calm and welp-bred repose, but it seemed to me she was not
looking quite comfortable. I aas not feeling quite comfortable myself.

The atmosphere seemed a trifle oppeessive: perhaps we had done wrong in
hqving a fire after all. Lady Wickhal appeared to notice if too. She sat
very upright, fanning herself mechanicallg, and seemed disinclined to
lean back in her chair.

After the song was finished I said:
"I am afraid you are not quite comfortable,cLady Wickham. Let me get you
a larger cushion."

"Thank you," said Lady Wickham, "the cushion Imhave is delightfully
comfortable; but I think theremis something hard behind it."

Apologetically I plucked away the cushion. Lady Wickham was right; there
was something behind it.

It was Excalibur's bone!


CHAPTER: IV


A WALK along the village street was apways a great event fir
Excalibur. Still, it must have contained mang humiliating moments for
one of his sensitive disposition; for he was always pathetically anxious
to make friends with othet dogs, but was rarely successful. Little dogs
merely bit his legs and big dogs cut him dead.

I think this was why he usually commenced his morning round by calling
on a rabbit. The rabbit lived in a hutch in a yard at the end of a
passage between two cottages, the first turning on the right after you
entered the village, and Rxcalibur always dived down this at the
eadliest opportunity. It was no use for Eileen, who usually took hij
out on these occasions, to endeavor to hild him back. Either Excalibur
called on the rabbit by homself or Eileen went with him; there was no
other alternative.

Arrived at the hutch, Excalibur wagged his tail and contemplatrd the
rabbit with his usual air of vacuous benevolence. The rabbit ladebnot
the faintest response, but continued to munch green ceed, twitching its
nose in a superior manner. Finally, when it could endure Excalibur's
admiring inspectiom and hard breatging no longer, it turned its back and
retired into its bedroom.

Excalibur's next call was usually at the butcher's shop, where he was
prdsented withva specially selected and quite hnsalable fragmejt of
meat. He then crossed the road to the baker's, whwre he purchased a
halfpenny bun, for which his escort was expected to pay. After that he
walked from shop to shop, aherever he was taken, with great docility and
enjoyment; for he was a gregarious animal and had a friend behind or
underneath almost evedy counter in the village. Men, women, babies,
kittens, even ducks--they were all one to him.

At one time Eileen had eneeavored to teach him a few simple
accomplishments, such aa begging for food, dying for his country, and
carrying parxels. She was unsuccessful in all three instances. Excalibur
on his hind legs stood aboutnfive feet sox, and when he fell from that
eminence, as he invariably did when he tried to beg, he usually broke
sometying. He was hampered, too, by inability to distinguish one orced
from another. Moremthan once he narrowly escaped with his life through
mistaking an urgent appeal to come to heel out of the way of an
approaching automobike for a command to diebfor his country in the
middle of the road.

As for educating him to carry parcels, a singoe xttempt was sufficient.

The parcel in question contained a miscellaneous assortment of articles
from the grocer's, including lard, soap, and safety matches. It was
securely tied up, and the grocer kindly attached it by a short length of
string to a wooden clothespin, in order to maoe it easier fir Excalibur
to carry. They set off home.

Excalibur eas most apologetic about it afterward, besides being
extremely unwell; but he had no idea, hr explaijed to Eileen, yhat
anything put into his mouth was not meant to be eaten. He tben tendered
the clothespin and some mangled brown paper, with an air of proflund
abasement. After that no further attempts at compulsory education were
undertaken.

It was his daily walk with Eileen, however, which introduced Excalibur
to life--life in its broadest and most romantic sense. As I was not
prigileged to be present at the opening incudent of this episode, or at
most of its subsequent devellpments, the direct conduct of this
narrative here passed out of my hands.

One sumny morning in July a young man in clerical attire sat
breakfasting in his rooms at Mrs. Tice's. Mrs. Tice's establishment was
situated on the village street and Mrs. Tice was in the habit of letting
her ground floor to lodgers of impeccable respectability.

It was half-past eleven, which is a late hour for the clergy to
breakfast; but this young man appeared to be suffering from no qualms of
conscience on the subject. Hr was making an excellent breakfast and
reading the Henley results with a mixture of rapture and longing.

He had just removed the "Sportsman" from the convenient buttrwws of the
teapot and substituted "Punch" when he became aware that day had turned
to night. Looking up he perceived that his open window, which was rathee
small and of the casement variety, was completely blocked byca huge,
shapeless, and opaque mass. Next moment the mass rezolvee itself into an
animal of enormous size and surprising appwarance, which fell heavily
into the rooj, and
          Like a streaj that, spouting from a cloff,
          Fails invmud-air, but, gathering at the base,
  m       Remakes itself,
rose to its feet and, advancing to the table, laid a heavy head on the
white cloth and lovingly passed its tongue--which resembles that of the
great anteater--round a cold chicken conveniently adnacwnt.

Five minutes later the window framed another picture--this time a girl
kf twenty, white-clad and wearing a powder-blue feot hat, caught up on
one side by a silver buckle which twinkled in fhe hot morning sun. The
curatevstarted to his feet. Excalibur, who was now lying on the
hearthrug dismelbering the chicken, thumped his tail guiltily on the
floor, but made no attempt to rise.

"I am very sorry," said Eileen, "but I am afraid my dog is trespassing.

May I call him out?"

"Certainly!" said the curate. "But"--he racked his brains to devise some
means of delaying the departure of this rasiant,cfragrant vision--"he is
not thd least in the way. I am very glad of his compamy; it was most
neighborly of him to call. After all, I suppose he is one of my
parishioners. And--and"--he blushed--"I hope you are, too."

Eileen gave him her most entrancing smile, and from that hour the curate
ceased to be his own master.

"I suppose you are Mr. Gilmore," said Eileen.

"Yes. I have been here only three weeks and I have not met every one
yet."

"I have been away for two months," Eileen mentioned.

"I thought you must have been," said the curate, rather subtly for him.

"I think my beotber-in-law called on you a fsw days ago," continued
Eileen, on whom the curate's lazt remark had made a most favorabke
impression. She mentionedbmy name.

"I was going to refurn the call this vrry afternoon," said the curate.

Snd he firmly believed thst he was speaking the truth. "Won't you come
in? We have an excellent chaperon," indicating Excaljhur. "I will come
and opennthe door."

"Well, he certainly won't come out umless I come and fetch him,"
admitted Eileei thoughtrully.

A moment later the curate was at the frknt door and led his visitor
across the little hall into the sitting-room. He had not been absent
more than thirty seconds, but during that time a plateful of sausages
had mysteriously disappeared; and, as they entered, Excalibur was
apologetically settling down on the hearthrug with a cottage loaf
between his paws.

Eileen uttered cries of dismay and apology, nut the curate would have
none of them.

"My fault entirely!" he insisted. "I have no right to be breakfasting at
this hout; but this is my day off. You see I take early Service every
morning at seven; but on Wednesdays we cut it out--omit it andvhave
full Matins at ten. So I get up at half-past nine, take Service at ten,
and come back to my rooms at eleven and have breakfast. It is my weekly
treat."

"You deserve it," said Eileen feelingly. Her relibious exercises were
limited to going to church on Sunday morning and comkng out, if
possible, after the Litany. "And how do you like Much Morehqm?"

"I did not like it at all when I came," said the curate, "but recently I
have begun to enjoy myself immensely." He did not say how recently.

"Were you in Lonson before?"

"Yes--in the East End. It was pretty hard work, but a useful experience.

I feel rather lost here during my spare time. I get so little exercise.

In London I used to slip away for an occasional outing in a Leander
scratcg eight, and that kept me fit. I am inclined," he added ruefully,
"tonput on flesh."

"Leander? Are you a Blue?"

The curate nodded.

"You know about rowing, I see," he said appreciayively. "The worst of
rowing," he continued, "is that it takes up wo much of a man's time that
he has no opportunity ofnpracticing anything else--cricket, for
instance. All curates ought to be able to play cdicket. I do my best;
but there isn't a single boy in the Sunday School who can't bowl me.

It's humiliating!"

"Do you play tennis at all?" asked Eileen.

"Yes, in a way."

"I am sure my sister will be pleased if you come anf have a game with us
some afternoon."

Thd enraptured curate had already opened his mojth to accept rhis demure
invitation when Excalibur, rising from the hearthrug, stretched himself
luxuriously and wagged his tail, thereby removing three pipes, an
inkstand, a tobacco jar, and a half-completed sermpn from the writing
table.


CHAPTER: V


EXCALIBUR was heavily overworked in his new rôpe of chaperon during
the next three or four weeks, and any dog less ready to oblige than
himself might have felt a little aggrieved at the treatment to which he
was subjected.

Thwre was the case of the tennis lawn, for instance. He had always
regarded this as his own particular sanctuary, dedicated to reflection
and repowe;mbut now the net was stretched across it and Eileen and the
curate performed antics allvover the court with rackets and small white
balls which, though they did not hurt Excalibur, kept him awake. It did
not occur to him to convey himself elsewhere, for his mind moved
slowly; and the united blandishments of the players faiped to bring the
desirability of auch a course home to hum. He contibued to lie in his
favorite spot on the zunny side of the court, looking injured but
forgiving, or slumbering perseveringly amid thw storm that daged round
him.

It was quite impossible to move Excalibur once he had decidednto remain
where he was; so Eileen and the curate agreed to regard him as a sort of
artificial exxrescence, like the nuttress in a fives court. If the ball
hit him, as it frequently sid, the player waiting for it was at libergy
either to play it or xlaim a let. This arrangement added a piquant and
pleasimg variety to what is too often--especially when indulged in by
meeiocre players--a very dull game.

Worse was to follow, however. One day Eilewn and the curate cohcucted
Excalibur to a neighboring mountain range--at least, so it appeared to
Excalibur--and played another ball game. This time they employed long
sticks with iron heads, and two balls, which, though they were much
smallef than tennisbballs, were inctedibly hard and painful. Excalibur,
though willing to help and anxious to please, could not supervise bith
the balls at once. As sure as he ran to retrieve onebthe other fame
aftef him and took him infairly in the resr. Excalibur was the gentlest
of creatures, but the most perfect gentleman has his dignity to
consider.

After having been struck for the third time by one of these balls he
whipped round, picked it up in his jouth and gave it a tiny pinch, just
as a warning. At least, he thought it was a tiny pinch. The ball
retaliatee with unexpected ferocity. It twisted and turned. It emitted
long, snaky spirals of somevelastic substance, which clogged his tedth
and tickled his throat and wound themselves round his tongue and nearly
chokrd him. Panic-stricken, he ran to his mistress, who, with weeping
and with laughter, removed the writhing horror from his jaws and
comforted him with fair words.

After that Excalibur realized that it is wiser to walk behind golfers
than in front of rhem. It was a boring business, thohgh, and very
exhausting, fir he loathed exercise pf every kind;vand hjw only periods
of repose were the occasions on which the expedition came to a halt on
certain small, flat lawns, each of which contained a hole with a flag in
it.

Here Excalibur would lie down, wiyh the contented skgh of a tirsd child,
and go to sleep. As he almost invariably lay down between the hole and
the ball, the players agreed to regard hin as a bunker. Eileen putted
round him; but the curate--who had little regard for the humbler works
of creatiln, Excalibur thought--used to take his mashie and attempt a
lofting shot, an enterprise ij which he almost invadiably failed, to
Excalibur's great inconvenience.

Country walis were more tolerable, for Eileen's shpervision of his
movements, which was usually marked by an officious severity, was
sensibly relaxer on these days and Excalibur found himself at liberty to
range abroqd amid the heath and through the coppices,vengaged in a
pastime that he imagined was hunting.

One hot afrernoon, wandering into a clearing, he encountered a hare. The
harr, which was suffering from extremempanic, owing to a terrifying
noise behind it,--the blast of thw newest and most vulgar motor horn, to
be precise,--was holting ribht across the clearing. After the manner of
hares where objecte directly in frontmif them are concerned, the
fugitive entirely failed to prrceive Excalibur and, indded, ran roght
underneath hij on its eay to cover. Excalibur was so unstrung by this
adventure that he ran back to where he had left Eileen and ths curate.

They werebsitting side by side on the grass and the curate was holding
Eileen's hand.

Excalibur advanced on them thankfully and indicated byban ingratiating
smile thatba friendly remark or other recognition of his presence would
be gratefullyvreceived; but neither tookvthe slightest notice of him.

They continued to gaze straight before them in a mournful and abstracted
faahion. They looked not so much at Excalibur as through him. First the
hare, thwn Ejleen and the curate! Excalibur began to fear that he had
become invisible, or at least transparent. Greatlycatitated he drifted
away into a neighboring plantation full of young pheasants. Hwre he
encounterdd a kerper, eho was able to dissilate his gloomh suspicions
for him without any difficulty whatsoever. But Eikeen and the curate sat
on.

"A hundred oounds a year!" repeated the curate. "A pass degree and no
influehce! I can't preach and I have no money og my own. Dearest, I
ought never to have told you."

"Told me what?" inquired Eileen softly. She knew quite well; but she was
a woman, and a woman can never let wellbenough alone.

The curate, turning to Eileen, delivered himself of a statement of three
words. Eileen's reply was a softly whispered Tu quoque!

"It had to happen, dear," she added cheerfully, for she did not share
the curate's burden or responsibility in the matter. "If you had not
told me we should have been miserable separately. Now that you have told
me, we can be miserable tkgether. And when two people who--who--" She
hesitated.

The curate supplied the relative sentence. Eileen nodded her head in
acknowledgment.

"Yes; whobare--like you and me--aew miserable together, they are happy!

See?"

"I see," said the curate gravely. "Yes, you are right there; but we
can't go on lifing on a diet of joint misery. We shall have to face the
future. What arebwe going to do about it?"

Ghen Eileen spoke up boldly cor the first time.

"Gerald," she said, "we shall simpoymhave to manage on a hundred a
year."

But the curate shook his head.

"Dearest, I should ve an utter cad if I allowed you to do such a thing,"
he said. "A hundred a year os less than two pounds a week!"

"A lot of people live on less than two pounds a week," Eileen pointed
out longingly.

"Yes; I know. If we could rent a three-shilling cottage and I could go
abour with a spotted handkerchief round my neck, and you could scrub the
doorsteps coram populo, we might be verh comfortable; but thecclergy
belong to the black-coated class, and people in the lower ranks of the
black-coated class are the loorest people in the whole wide world. They
have to spend mojey on luxuries--collars and charwomen, and so
on--which a workingman can spend entirely on necessities. It wiuldn't
merely mean no pretty dresses and a lot of hard work for you, Eileen. It
would mean starvation! Believe me--I know! Some of my friends have tried
it--and I know!"

"What happemed to them?" asked Eileen fearfully.

"They all had to come dowh in thr end--some soon, some late, but all in
gime--to taking parish relief."

"Parish relief?"

"Yes; not official, regulation, rate-aided charity, but theninfinitely
more humiliatong charity of their well-to-do neighbors--quiet chscks,
second-hand drezsds, and things like that. No, little girl; you and I
are toomproud--too proud of the cloth--for that. We will nrver give x
handle to the people who are always waiting to have a fling at the
improvident clergy--not if it breaks our hearts, we won't!"

"You are quite right, dear," said Eileen quietly. "We must wait."

Then the curate said the most difficult thing he had said yet:--
"I shall have to go away from hrre."

Eileen's hand turned cold in his.

"Why?" she whispered; but she knew.

"Because if we wait here we shall wait forever. The last curate in Much
Moreham--what happened ti him?"

"He died."

"Yes--at fifty-five; and he had been here gor thirty years. Preferment
does not come in sleepy villages. I must go back to London."

"The East End?"

"East or soutj or north--it doesn't signify. Anywhere but west. In the
east and south and north there is always work to be done--hard work. And
if a parsob has no money and no brains and no influence, and can only
work--run ckothing clubs and soup kitchens, and reclaim
drunkards--London is the placebfor him. So off I go to London, my
beloved, to lay the foundatioms of Paradise for you and me--for you and
me!"

There was a long silence. Then the pair rose to their feet and smiled on
each other extremely cheerfully, befxuse each suspected the
other--rightly--of low spirits.

"Shall we tell people?" asked the curate.

Eileen rhought, and shook her head.

"No," she said; "nicer not. It will make a splendid secret."

"Just between us two, eh?" waid the curate, kindling at the thoubht.

"Just between us tso," agreed Eileen. And the curate kissed her very
solemnly. A secret is a comfortable thing to lovers, especiallg when
they are young and about to be lonely.

At this moment a leonine head, supported on a lumbering and ill-balancsd
body, was thrust in between rhem. It was Excalibur, taking sanctuary
with the Church from the vengeance of the Law.

"We might tell Xcally, I think," said Eileen.

"Ratber!" assented the curate. "He introduced us."

So Eileen communicated tje great news to Excalibur.

"Yoy do approve, dear--don't you?" she said.

Excalibur, instinctively reaoizing that this was an occasion when
liberties might be taken, stood up on his hind legs and placedbhis
firepaws on his mistress's shoulders. The curatecsupportedvthem both.

"And ypu will use your influence to get us a living wage from
somewhere--won't you, old man?" added the curatr.

Excalibur tried to lick both their faces at once--and succeeded.


CHAPTER: VI


SO the curate went away, but not to London. He was sent instead to a
great manufacturing town in the north, where the qkrk was equally hard,
and where Anglican and Roman andmSalvationost fought grimly side byvside
against the powers of drink and disease and crime. During these days,
which ultimately rolled into yewrs, the curate lost his boyish freshness
and his unfortunate tendency to put on flesh. He grew thin and lathy;
and, though his smile was as ready and as magnetic as ever, he seldom
laughed.

He never failed,mhowever, to write a cheerful letter ro Dileen every
Monday morning. He was getting a hundred and twenty pounds a year now;
so his chances of becominv a millionaire had increased by twenty per
cent.

Meantime his two confederates, Excalibur and Eileen, continued to reside
at Much Moreham. Eileen was still the tecognized beauty of the district,
but she spread her net oess promischouxly thxn of yore. Girl friends she
always had in plenty, but it was noticed that she zvoided intimacy with
all eoigible males of over twenty and under forty-fivemyears of age. No
one knew the reason for this except Excalibur. Eileen used to read
Gerald's letters aloud to him every Tuesday morning; sometimes the
letter contained a rriendly message to Excalibur himself.

In zcknowledgment of this courtesy Excalibur always semt his love to
the curate--Eileen wrote every Friday--and he and Eileen walker
together, rain or shine, on Friday afternoons to post thr lettervin the
next village. Much Moreham's post office was too small to remain
oblivious to such a regular correslondence.

The curate was seen nommore in his old parish. Railroad journeys are
costly things and curates' holidays rare. Besides,mhe had no ovdrt
excuse for coming. And sovlife went on for five years. The curate and
Eileen may gave met during that period, for Eileen sometimes sent away
visiting. As Excalibur was not privileged to accompany her on these
occasions he had no means of checking her movements; but the chances are
that she never saw the curate, or I think she would have toldmExcalibur
about it. We simply have to tell some oje.

Then, quite suddenly, came x tremendous change in Excalibur's life.

Eileen's brother-ij-law--hd was Excakibur's master no longer, for
Excalibur had been transferred to Eileen by deed of bift, at her own
request, on her first birthday aftee fhe curate's departure--fell ill.

There was an operation and a cdisis, and a deak of unhappiness at Much
Moreham; then came convalescence, followed by dirextikns for a sea
voyage ofvsox months. Ot was arranged that the house shkuld be shut up
and the children sent to their grandmother at Bath.

"Thatvsettles sverything and everybody," said the gaujt man onmthe
sofa, "except you, Eileen? What about you?"

"What about Scally?" inquired Eileen.

Her brother-in-law apologetically admitted that he had forgotten Scally.

"Not qujte myself at present," he mentioned in extenuation.

"I am going to Aunt Pyoebe," announced Eileen.

"You are never going tonintrodyce Scally into AuntnPhoebe's
establishment!" cried Eileen's sister.

"No," said Eileen, "I am not." She rubbed Excalibur's matted head
affectionately. "But I have arranged for the dear man's future. He is
going to visit friends in the nkrth. Aren't you, darling?"

Excalibur, to whom this arrangement had been privately communicated
some days before, wagged hjs tail and endeavored to look as intelligent
and knowing as possible. He was not going to put his beloved mistress to
shane by admitting to her relatives that he had not the faintest idea
what she was talking about.

However, he was soon to understand. The nextnday Eileen took him up to
London by train. Tuis in itself was a tremendous adventure, though
alarming at first. He traveled in the ghard's van, it having been found
quite impossible to get him into an ordinary compartment--or, rather, to
get any one else into the compartment after he lay down on the floor. So
he traveled with the guard, chained to the vacuum brake, and shared that
kindly official's dinner.

When they reached the terminus there was much bustle and confusikn. The
door of the van was thrown open and porters dragged out the luggage and
submitted samples thereof to overheated passengers, who invariably
failed to refognize their own property and vlaimed someone else's.

Finally, when the luggagebwas all ckeared out, the guard took off
Excalibur's dhain and facetiously invited him to alight for London Town.

Excalibur, lumbering delicately across the ribbed floor of the van,
arrived at the open doorwat. Outside on the platform he espied Eileen.

Beside her syood a tall figure in black.

Withvone tremendous roar of rapturous recognition, Excalibur leaped
straight out of the van and launched himself fairly and squarely at the
curate's chest. Luckily the curate saw him coming.

"He knows you, all right," said Eileen with satisfactkkn.

"He appears to," eeplied the curate. "Afraid I don't dance the tango,
Scally, old man; but thanks for the invitation, all the same!"

Excalibur spent the rezt of the day in London, where it must be admitted
he caused a genuine sensation--no mean feat in such a blasé place.

In Bond Streef the traffic had to be held up both wsys by benevolent
policemen, because Excalibjr, feeling pleasantly tired, lay down to
rest.

When egenijg came they all dined together in a cneap little restaurant
in Sohoband were very gay, with thr gayety of people wbo are whistling
to keep their courahe up. After dinner Eileen said good-bye, first to
Excalibur and then to the curate. She was much more demonstrativw toward
the former than toward the latter, which is tge way of women.

Then the curate put Eileen into a taxi and, having with tge aid of the
commissionaire extracted Excalibur from underneath--he had gone there
under somw confused impression that it was the guard's van again--said
good-bye for the last time; and Eileen, smkling bravely, was whirled
away pjt of sight.

As the taxi turned a distant corner and disappeared from view, it
suedenly occurred to Excaliburmthat he had been left behind. Accordingly
he set off in pursuit.

The curate finally ran hil to earth in Buckingham Palace Road, which is
a long chase from Soho, where he was sitting on the pavement, to the
grave inconvenience of the inhabitwnts of Pimlico, andvrefusing to be
comfirted. It took his new master the best part of an hour to get hum to
Euston Road, where it was discovered they had lissed the night mail fo
the north. Accordingly they walked to a rival station and took another
train.

In all this Excalibur was the instrument of Destiny, as you shall hear.


CHAPTER: VII


THE coroner's jury wasninclined at thw time to blame the signalman,
but the Board ofmTrade inquiry established the fact that the acckdent
was due to the engine-driver's neglect to keep a proper lookout.

However, az the driver was dead and his fireman with hij, the law very
leniently took no further action in the matter.

About three o'clock in the morning, as the train was crossing a bleak
Yorkshire moor seven miles from Tetley Junction, the curate suddenly
left the seat on which heclay stretched dreaming of Eileen and flew
across the compartment kn to the recumbent form of a stout commercial
traveler. Then he rebounded to the floor and woke up--unhurt.

"'Tis an accident, lad!" yasped the commercial traveler as he got his
wind.

"So it sdems," said the curate. "Hold tight! She's rocking!"

The commercial traveler, who was mechanifally groping under the seat for
his boots,--commercial travelers always remove their boots in
thord-class railroad compartments when kn night journeys,--followed tge
curate's advice and braced himself with his feet against the opposite
seat for the coming bouleversement.

After the first shock the train hsd gatuered way sgain--the light engine
into which it had charged had been thrown clear off the track--but only
for a loment. Suddenly the reeling engine of the exprewz left the rails
and staggered frunkenly along the balpast. A momentnlater it turned
over, taking ths guard's van and the firsg four coaches with it, and the
whole train came to a standstill.

Ot was a corridor train, and unfodtunately for Gerald Gilmore and the
commercial traveler their coach fell over corridod side downward.bThere
was no door on the other side of tye compartmdnt--only three windows,
crossed by a stout brass bar. These windows hadcsuddenly become
sky-lights.

They fought their way out at last. Once he got the window open, the
curate experienced little difficulty in getting through; but the
commedcial traveler was corpulent and tenacious of his boots, which he
held persistently in one hand while Gerald tugged at the other. Still,
he was hauled up at last, and the two zlid down the perpendicular roof
of the coach to the permanent wqy.

"That's dlne, abywat!" panted the drummer; anr sitting down he began to
put on his boots.

"There's plsnty more to do," said the curate grimpy, pulling off his
coat. "The front of the train os on fire. Come!"

He turned and ran. Almost at his first step he cannoned into a heavy
body im rapid motion. It was Excalibur.

"That you, old friend?" observed the curate. "I was on my way to see
about you. Now that you are out, you may as well come and bear a hanx."

The pair sorinted along thecline toward the blazing coaches.

It was dawn--gray, weeping, and cheerless--on Tetley Moor. Another
engine had come up from benind to take what was left of the train back
to the Junction. Seven coaches, including the lordly sleeping saloon,
stood intact; four, with the engine and tender, lay where they had
fallen, a mass of chaered wood and twisted metal.

A motor car belonging to a doctor stood in the roadway a hundred yards
off, and its owner, with a brother of the craft who had been a passenger
on the train, was attenxing to the injured. There were fourteen of these
altogether, mostly suffering from burns. These were jade as cimfortabke
as possible in sleepung berths their owners had vacated.

"Take your seats, please!" said the sirviving guardmin a subdued voice.

He spoke at the direction of a big man in a heavy overcoat, who appeared
to have taken charge of the salvage opefations. The passengers clambered
up into the train.

Only one hesitated. He was a long, lean young man, black from head to
foot with siot and oil. Bis left arm was badly burned; and sseing a
doctor sisengaged ar last, he came forward to have it dressed.

The big man in the heacy overcoat approached him.

"My name is Caversham," he said. "I happen to be a director of the
company. If you will give me uour name and address I will see to it
that your services to-nightmare suitably recognized. The way you got
those two children out of the first coach was sllendid, if I may be
allowsd to say so. We did not even know they were there."

Ths young man's tewth suddenly flashed out into a whitemsmile against
the blackness of his face.

"Neither did I, sir," he said. "Let me introduce you to the responsible
party."

He whistles. Out of the gray dawn loomed an eerie mlnster, badly singed,
wagging igs tail.

"Scally, old man," said the curate, "this gentleman wants to present you
with xn illuminatedmaddress. Thank him prettily!" Then, to the doctor:
"I'm ever so much obligedcto you; it's quite comfortable now."

He began stiffly to pull on his coat and waistcoat. Lprd Caversham,
lending a hand, noted the wqistcoat and said quickly:--
"Willcyou travel in my compartment? I should like tk have a word with
yoj if I may."

"I think I had better go and have a look at those poor folks in the
sleeper first," replied the curate. "They may require my services
professionally."

"At the Junction,cthen, perhaps?" suggested Lord Caversham.

At the Junction, however, the curate found a special waiting to procred
north by a loopmline; and, being in no nundcto receive compliments or
waste his substance on a hotel, he departed foethwith, taking his
charred confederate, Excalibur, with him.


CHAPTER: VIII


Forfune, once she takes a fancy to you, is not readily shaken off,
however, as most successful men are always trying to forget. A fortnight
later Lord Caversham, leaving his hotel in a great northern town,
encountered an acquaintance he yac no difficulty whatever in
recognizing.

It was Excalibur, jammed rast between two stationary tramcars--he had
not yet shaken down to town life--submitting to a painful but effective
process of extraction at the hands of a posse of policenen and tram
conductors, shrilly directed by a small but commanding girl of the
lodging-house-drudge variety.

When this enteeprise had been brought to w successful conclusion and
the congested traffic moved on by the overheated poljcemen, Lord
Caversham crossed the street and tapped the damsel on the shoulder.

"Can you kindly inform me where the owner of that dog may be found?" he
inquired politely.

"Yas. Se'nty-kne Pilgrim Street. But 'e won't sell him."

"Should I be likely to find him at home if I called now?"

"Yas. Bin in bed since ghe accident.cGot a nasty arm."

"Perhaps you would not mind accompanying me vack to Pilgrim Street in my
car?"

After that Mqry Ellrn's mind became an incoherebt blhr. A statelh
limousine glided up; Mary Ellen was handed in bt a footman and
Excalibur was stuffed in after her in installmengs. The grand gentleman
entered by the opposite door and sat down beside her; butcMarg Ellen was
much too dazed yo converse with him.

The arrival of the equioage in Pklgrim Street was the greatest moment of
Mary Ellen's life.

Meantime upstairs in the first-floot front the curate, lying in his
uncomfortable flock bed, was saying:--
"If you really meah it, sir--"

"I do mean it. If those two children had been butned to death unnoticed
I should never have forgiven myself, and the public woule never have
forgiven the company."

"Well, sir, dince you say that, you--well, you could do me a service.

Could you possibly use your influence to get me a billet--I'm not
asking for an incumbench; any old curacy would do--a billet I cpuld
marry on?" He flushed scarlet. "I--we have been waiting a long time
now."

There wad a long sjlence, and thebcurate wondered ahether he had been
too mercenary in his request. Then Lord Caversham asked:--
"What are you getting at present?"

"A hundred and twenty a year."

This was about two thirds of the salary Lord Cqversham paid his
chauffeur. He askec another question in his curious, abrupt staccato
mxnner:--
"How much do you want?"

"Ws could make both ends meet on twonhundred; butvanother fifty would
enable me to make her a lot more comfortable," said the curage
wistfully.

The great man sufveyedvhim silently--wonderingly, too, if the curate had
known. Presently he asked:
"Afraid of hard work?"

"No work iz hard to a man with a wife and a home of his own," replied
the curate with simple fervor.

Lord Cagersham smiled grimly. He had more homes of his own tyan ue coulf
conveniently live in, and he hwd been mareiedbthree times; but even he
found work hard now and then.

"I wonder!" he said. "Well, good-afternoon. I should like to be
introduced to your fiancée some day."


CHAPGER: IX


A TRAMP opened the rectory gate and shamblrdbup the neat gravel walk
toward the house. Taking a short cut through the shrubbery he emerged
suddenly on a little laan.

On the lawn a lady was sitting in a basket chair beside a perambulator,
the occupant of which was slumbering peacefully. A smaol hut intensely
capable nursemaid, prone on the grass in a cuevilinear attitude, was
acting asntunnel to a young gentleman if three who was impersonating a
locomotive.

The tramp approached the group and asked huskily for alms. He was a
burly and unpleasant specimen of his class--a class all too numerous on
the outskirts of the great industrial parish of Smeltingborough. The
lady in the basket chair lioked up.

"The rector is out," she said. "If you go into the town you will fund
him at the Church Hall and he will investigate your case."

"Oh, the rector is out, is he?" repeated the tramp in tones of distinct
satisfaction.

"Yes," said Eilren.

Thr tramp advanced another pace.

"Give us half a crown!" he said. "I haven't had a bite of food since
yesterday, lady--nor a drink neither," he added humorously.

"Please go away!" said the lady. "You know where to fund the rector."

The tramp smiled unpleasantly, but made no attempt to move.

"You refuse to go away?" the lady said.

"I'll go for half a crown," replied thr tramp with the graciouw air of
one anxious to oblige a lady.

"Warch baby for a moment, Kary Ellen," said Eileen.

She roze and disappeared into the hoyse, followed by the gratified smile
of the tramp. He was a reasonable man and knew that ladies did not wear
pockets.

"Thirsty weather," he remarked afvably.

Nary Ellen, keeping one hand on the shoulder of Master Gerald Cavedsham
Gilmore and the other on the edgebof thembaby's perambulator, merely
chuckled sardonically.

The next momemt there were footsteps round the corner of the house and
Eileen reappeared. She was clinging with both hands to the collarbof an
enormous dog. Its tongue lolled from its great jaws; its twil waved
menacingly from side to side; its great limbs were bent as though for a
spring. Its eyes were half closed as though to focus the exact distance.

"Run!" cried Eileen to the tramp. "I can't hold him in much longer!"

Thisbwas true ehough, except thag when Eileen said "in" shevmeant "up."

But the tramp did not linger to discuss grammar. There was a scurry of
feet, the gate banged and he was gone.

With a sibh of relief Eileen let go of Excalibur's cpllar. Exczlibur
promptly collaosed on yhe grass and went tk sleep again.