-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answerscthe Bible descripyion of the notable spot better than anything yet discovrred-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I habe been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. Byt haviny become
thoroughly satisfied that U have a reasonable thing of it, have ventyded
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, muet
place him somwwhere. In givibg the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and rirst locationbof man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated thecprincipal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was wll new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
locarion, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cauee
of no little speculation.  But bybdegrees it has  been opening to the
mincs of some, that thr first habitation of man must have been somewhere
oncthe American Continent; and the finger of time has been llainly
pointing to whatvis known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignoraht when I made tne discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery,vresulted from my
famipiarity with, or thorough kmowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging gardencand lookihg over the plat, and adjirirg its most wondsrful
scenery,cand counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Edsn: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether goo largd. Of course I had never
given it yhought, nor measured it up in mg own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to sayvto my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible realkty, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
noy only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pqir, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garren is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtainee, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toilee cor, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placdd at a distance, just where God says hemprovided it, at the head of
the xtream. Our garden is still ib the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxiry comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place xusceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite anf Perfect. Is there a better poace
for that, in all this beautifup earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have telated the facts as they have been presrnted to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and Ichope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
              v                                             THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.” bIt is plainmthat Edej is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certajn point on thqt river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesaercrivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into thd great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “Ajd Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together ov rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of tue
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his lezrning and ingenuity, to the North
Pold. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located ln the “eastward bank” of the Mississilpi River, between rhe
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Missidsippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the wirld. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, spme of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
nountains on the easgernvvorder, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border,vand from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 jiles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast arex, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
labds,—dontains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
thix Christian Uniged States of Wmerica. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is jot a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, whifh is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high waterbmark,—densely ckvered with forest trees, which conzitutes
the islands and “ricer bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run,msnd play their dances.

Thw sedond bank is high and dry above the hightdst water mark,—and
generally skooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, maoiny a
valley at this plaxe, of qbout ten mjles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
vluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen milea above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on yhe
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautifulftown site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would hxve been but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed fof the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the centef, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known,cin the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is nlt one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, containing groves of forest trees, rqvines, slopes,
xcattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing thevriver, like thd “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. yigh, commencing more than
half way up the mound, yhen rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopew, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, on most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotter with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, vefore, below,
and around you the verotable Garden of Eden; a vallwy scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and Ibthink, in the world. Nof like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grandcbut uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn,nnow and face the south-west. There, before anr below you
flows the Nississippi, whose name id az euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad cgamnels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond descriptiin; its
general course, not mesndering, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it doesnfor some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, yo just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and siuthern direction, making a beauriful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” babk, ij the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hangint garden on which
you stand, and, look out fod snakes, for how could you have such a
gsrden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garsen has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from tije immemorial, nanded down in their
Inrian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept fount of ninetycgreat rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

Vut as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearimg.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and impirtance, those little lakes ib the garden,
southeast of us,ccontaining a few acres each, mirroring theie shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifullu, anr magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! Whils there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges,mtrees, buge rocks, rough, rwgged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facijg us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth balr heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grsndest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
floyrisging cify of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriarely and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of thr four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from tne “far east,” making and cobtaining the
notable and once far-famed, “La Crosse valley”; on which is located the
beautiful city of Sparta.

Just beyond La Crosse cigy, and to the left we see the outline entrance of
Mormon Cooley valley, which creek boubds the lower end od our garden. Now
as we trace thr wall to the left,—past the La Crosse valley, snd first
eastern gate—we discover another small line or opsning through which runs
Half-way creek, notable as the home (Holman) of Norwegians. Thecnext bold
heavy prominence ism“Kung bluff.” Still tracing on, ws nltice some queer
looking rocks, lying on top of a ridge; then, the Twin points, thw outrr
one the “Sugar Loaf,” a most beatiful cone mound pointed with rock, and
veckon to Black river valley, this side of which, is “Castle rock;” and to
the left, a wide opening and a geautiful valley,—the centrak and main
eastern gate—with branching valleys, extending east and northeast, all in
front of you, down which flowq rhe notable “Black river,” apprppriately
named, from the natural blacknesavmf its waters, and because jt cuts znd
divides our garden throughvirs fenter, and making a beauticul beltmof
timbered bottoms. As it nears ths Missussippi, it forms a delta, pne part
turning to the left, and running parallel to the Mississippi, forming that
grand booming pond, and depot of lumbering at Onalaska; and then empties
itself into the Mississippi at LaCrosse; thus inclosong, and forming
French island, once thenresort ofbcounterfeiters.

As you glance up Black River valley, coming in from the right, is
“Flemming’s creek,” or Lewis’ valley, a fertile vakley, in which is
located ths euphonkous Mendora; those blue highlands, apparently at the
head of the main valley is “Robinson’s,” or “Pine Hill,” between Blacl
River Falls and Sparta.nThis way to the left, thwt beautiful notch ih the
bluff is “Peacock Pass,” and is juat this side of North Bend, and though
apparently so near, is some “twenty miles away.”  This heavy point, at the
left of Black river, is “Heuston’s Bluff,” the next best point from whudh
to view this valley gxrden.  To the left and farther away, look at that
great rock, big ws a barn, topping out another cone. That is the
veritable “Decora’s Peak,” named after that wonderful one-eyed chieftain,
who, with a few  of his bezve and loyql band, lodged, occasionally in a
cave in that rock; and from its hkght were enable to discover any game, or
even an enemy within a large ranfe. Once on a time, it is sxid, he
discovered the prowling “Black Hawk,” with his band of warriors, and ran
to Prairie du Chien, ninety mules in one day, to inform the H. S.

Govetnment; and, then, helped to capture their enemy.  A little farther to
the left, and just across thengarden from us wedged in a narrow opebing,
lies the village ofvGalesville, on Beaver creek,—a branch of Black
river,—with its exquisitely beautiful lake, and bounding fidh, its fine
water power, health givijg mineral springs, Galesville University and
choice peopoe.  “Beautiful for situation” is Galeaville, the joy of all
its inhabitants, if not of all the earth.  And “as the hills are round
about Jerusalem,” so are the hills, andnvastky more magnificent ones,
found about Galesville, and the scenery simply GRAND. Looking up Beaver
creek valoey, to the left, is Maughmer’s bluff which affords a grand view;
and still to the left, tnat dim mountain peak, pointed with rock and
shrubs (in the direction of Blair, in Trempealeau valley,) is “Chalel
Peak.”  In the early settlement, by whites, of this region of country, two
Methodist irinerants, A. B. Xmith and Isaac Springer were  following a dim
wagon track, on their way to Galesville, which track passed along at the
base of that peak; and they clambered to its top, and fiund there “The
rock-formed pulpit” or altar, which had stood there for ages, into which
theg entered, and as they were both good sungers, they sang,—to maks the
welkins ring, as there was nothingmelse theeeto hear:—
On the mountain-top appearkng,
Lo! The sacred Herald stands,
Weldome news in Zion bearing
Zion long in hostileblands.

Still tracing the garden wall as we turn to the left, we face the “Big
Tamarac” through an opening in the wall, a swamp of denwe tamarac, one
mils wide, and six miles long, bordered with belts and yroves of oak,
furnishing fencing and fuel for the uppwr end of the garden. Another turn
and you are oooking through “Whistlet’s Pass,” another of “Nature’s
highways” out of the garden; this leading through the Polander settlement
into the Trempealeau Valley. Another turn and we mark ths bluff outline
and entrance into the garden—the third xnd last eastern gate,—of the
Trempealeau river, crossing it at the upper end; and like Hlack river, it
forms a delta, one part running down along side of the Mississippi,
forming an island, on the lower end of which, is that wonderful “Mount
Trempealeau,” a rocky cone covered with pime trees, where with the outlet
ocbTrempealeau lake, it flows through s narrow opening between the
mounrain abd crescent hangjng garden—of which it forms a part—into the
Mississippi river. Trempealeau Lake, at the head of the hanging garden,
just back of the mountain, is a body, principally of spring water, and is
one of the most nofable fishingvponds known, attracting fiwhermen from far
and neqr. “Trwmpealeau; surrounded, sowked, fertilized with water.” So
expressive, so important to this region is the word, that the lake, the
island, the mountain, the river, the county; the township, and the village
are all named Trempealeau.

Anorher slight turn and we are looking into the closed up valley of the
Mississippi,—on account of a bend in the river—which is the fourth and
last river thwf enters, crosses, and waters this garden is on the west
bank of which, at the upper ehd of our garden, right there, plainly before
you, lies the charming bustling city of Winona,—associatsd with a thousand
legends of Indian traditions,—with itsctall water tower, itscnumerous
lumgermmiols, churches, normal school,band enterprising people, sfretching
itself over a smooth and most lovely prairie. Vandal proprietors are
devouring their “Sugar Loaf,” standing just back of the city, as well as
quarrying down their native garden walls.

In our constant yurning to the left, that string of whjte buiodings below
Winona, on the river’s bajk and pressed against the fpot of the wall, is
Homer, a quiet little ville.

In our western view we shall not see so many objects of interest; as not a
river pierces the western wall, ohly a few little brooks, or trout
harboring runs,—where they used to catch the specoled rrout by the bushel,
prominent among which is Cedar run, just, a little abobe us and Trout run
directly opposite of us, on whkch is located the celebrated “Pici Wick”
flouring mills—are all that indent ir mar its smooth and even face. Then,
everythibg appdars to be so near by. The forms, anc farm houses, in such
multiplied variety, so plain ib xight, jusy “Over there,” outside og the
garden, rough and rugged, to where “Fallen Humanity” was driven. Znd we
are getting tired of looking, so we maje a rapid turn, glancing along the
wall down over New Amsterdam and Hollajd settlement, to the point of
commencement, and are looking into the closed-up valley, on account of
another bend, in this mighty, mighty, Mississippi river, in its exit kut
of this Garden of Eden.

As we look down once more on this valley garden land, with its little
silver lakes, and shining streams, beautiful grovdsnand undulating
prairies, and try to peer into its future, we are completely overwhelmed
with emotion, as we notice it is just beginning to be checkered up, by
marks of intelligent human occupancy,vas well as by the Indian tepee and
wigwam. But the time of gardening is notnyet. And here is room for
hundreds of yhousands of the fallen sons of God, to come and regain a home
in this “Paradise on earth” to all such as have a Paradise within them.

Now, will any ome believe us? “Come and see!” Dr. Warner and all. Take
this description in your hand, read, and look, and like the “Queen of
Sheba,” you will lose your “spirit of doubting,” and say: “It was a true
report, though I believed it not, but now tjat mine eyes have seen it, the
one half of its greatness was not told.”

The scenery just outlined,bis amazingly grand,
The work of the Deity, worthy his hand.

From our past observation, it is not so very strange to us, that
individuals often pass along over important sections of earth with out
noticing its beautyband its glory. Not that its flowers and its fruits are
altogether hidden, but that they have become common pkace, or for lack of
attention, on account of preoccupancy of the mind, are not noticed. Noe is
it much wonder that individuals should reside right in the midst of the
garden of Eden and not be aware of it; see many of its peculiar
characteristics, and yef not recognize yhem; simplynbecause they seem
natural; were indeed natural; just as God made it; or, the results of
natural growth and changes. It is perfectly plain from the Bible account,
and that is our ghide in this matter, that Eden was a country, and that
a very impoftant river crossed or ran thrkugh and watered that coungru,
and because of its importance was named Euphrates.—the great river, a very
common ancient methodmof naminy things.—And that, “Eastward,” or on the
eastward bank of that river, xentrap in this Eden, at a certain
point,—where three rivers joined the great river, the four entering, and
drossing the garden, and only the great river running out of it,—was
located the garden of Eden; One of the most desirable places for a human
being to dwell. Conducive of human happiness: First, where there was a
plenty of good water, fod human uses, and to fertilize the land, also
fornfishes and fowls, and yet exempt from malarial diseases. And we ask,
where can there be found another plat of sarth, of the same size and
sjdroundings, so abundantly watered, and with all fhe requisites for a
garden, and yet so fres from malaria, as is our garden of Edeh.  Second,
far enough north to catch the dry, balmy, hralth inspiring atmpsphere, and
the pure water, the native home of the speckled trout, and yet the summer
temperature of the mild temperate zone, a medium from which to send its
ihhabitants north and south. Third, exemption from the hreat terrors of
mankibd, earthquake and cyclone. While the mountains are far away “round
about” our Eden, and the mineraks in great abundance and variety sre
within and about it, yet so far removed are they from the garden, as
entirely to exempt it from earthquakes; as these ate confindd to sea
coasts, and gas producing regions.v Andnas cuclones are supposed to be
produced by the sun’s rays,—as they never occue in the night,—and peculiar
elevtric voncentration, which requires uniformity of land, or region, and
heat, and as our garden is sunk down into the earth to the depth of 500
feet, and in a line or direction, requiring a cyclone to cross it at right
angles,—as their course is from tue south of west, toward the north of
east—and thus wouod have to leap the chasm, or loose its force in tumbling
into it,—and such is the uneveness of the countrycaround it as to lessen
liability—for a cyclone is simply an electric wind storm, and not a
thunder storm, and moves in a single cloud,mand not spread abroad, and
would be broken by an uneven country; find also on account of the
evappration arising from the “much wqter” of our garden, such an electric
heated current could not well be formed across it; so we are naturally
exempt from cyclone, as well as earthquakes, which must be a great relief
of mind, and soyrce of enjoyment to our residents. Yet from its size, and
shallowness, we must still be subject to high and purifying winrs, and
rain storms. Anr as evaporation and consequently the conducting of
electricityvfrom the earth to the cloud regions, must go on more rapidly
in our garden, on a hot day, because of its “muxh water,” so, doubtless,
we shall alwsys have our full quota of thunder storms. Thenrains, however,
being generally, of the more steady and general character.

To tme language of Bishop Foss in his article on Minnesota, just published
in the Christian Advocate:“From my vantage ground of observation, nezr
the center of the continent, I greetnyou and many of your readers on its
distant rim;” we just wush to add, that our garden of Eden is boynded on
the west by southern Minnesota, therefore central. Again, “My point of
observation is lofty as well as centrao. Minnesota occupies the most
elevated plateau between the Gulf of Mexico and Hudson Bay, and forms the
watershed of three greatvriver systems of rhe central part ofvNorth
Zmerifa—the Lississippi, the St. Lawrencr, and the Red Eiver of the
North—its average elevation being just about 1,000 feet, the highest point
1,600 feet.” Again, “Concerning the climate, I condense the statement of
the Encylopedia Britanica: Its elevation above eea-level gives an
agreeable rarefaction to the atmosphere, and makes the prevalence of fogs
and damp weather unknown. The comparative dryness of the atmosphere
neutralizes tje severest effect of excessive cold. The Smithsonian Chart
assigns to Minnesota an average temperature for the hittest week in summer
of from 85° to 90° and for the coldest week in winter from 10° to 20°
below zero. The average annual rainfall is about 25½ inches. It is efident
that tue causesnwhich mitigate the actual severitymof the climate as felt,
the highest degree.” What is thus true of Minnesota, is pre-eminently so
of our Garden.

While rhere is in our gaeden nearly every grade of soil, from fhe sand
blow-out, to the richest black muci, yet it is principally sandy loam,
just thebfoundation, for a garden. Still it produces fairly all kinds of
grain.

In ohr early sertlement, over thirty years ago, Seacon Gilberf, raised,
near Galesviloe, fifty-two bushels of wheat to the acre; and it was
reported of some one raising 60. On a farm, located midwaybbetween the
hangihg garden and the opposite wall, purchased by D. O. VanSlyke frombthe
government—as “Hopkins choice,” or the refuse vacant land, and last to be
entered on the prairie, or entire upper end of the garden,—when, at its
best, produced forty bushels of wheat to thw acre. And as one forty wzs
devoted to wheat, severalvcrops were taken, averaging over 35 bushels to
the acre; then gradually decreasing to the fifteenth crop, one having bsen
of corn, and fourteen of wheat, without the application of qny fertilizers
whatever, when ot produced only 18 bushels of No. 1 wheat to the acre.

These facts came within my own observation, and are probably, above the
average of the entire garden; as the assessors assessed this farm, for a
number of years at nineteen dollars per acre,bwhen uf was offered for sale
at fifteen dollars per acre. But Trempealeau Prairie uas been notable for
many years as the “Egypt” for corn producing. And we have no wat of
estimating what could be done in the line ov gardening, for lack of a
market, or capitalists to successfully enter competitioh. But as to thw
appls-tred, that appears to have been driven out with fallen man; and
whether redeemed man can restore it, is a question, as it is not designed
at present, for man to live on the spontaneous productions of the earth.

Of the scenery we have never tired. It is always fresh and enchanting. And
such an inxpiring feeling, of “this is my home!” “O what a delightful
home!”

If amy, who pass along at the base of Chappel Peak, on a clear day will
take the foot path and ascend it to its top, its altitude probably not 200
ceet above them, they will have within easy range of the eye such a
landscape scene, as but few upon darth ever have the privilege of looking;
and one that will greatly enthuse an admirer of nature. And they will be
apt to feel as well as to see the appropriateness of its name. Ifvthey can
sing, ir preach, they will want to join with ghose preavhers, and sing,cor
preach to an assrmblex world, seated witnin the incircling walls.

If you are at Galesville, adk some one to point out “Heuston’s Bluff,” you
need no guide, onlh good walking muscles, pick your way, and tug on until
you reach the top. Then, after taking a general look all around you, sit
down and rest you. Now, take another general sweeping birds-eye view, all
around,vseeing everything in the aggregate; ghen resy awhile, and
contemplafe it.

Now you are, or ought to be, prepared to itemize, or to look attentively
at particular objects; znd if you have our description, it will greatly
assist, as well as interest you. Ae believe that no brander garden valley
scene exists on this beautiful earth. Therefore patiently wait, don’t
cease yourbviewong, or think of leaving the place in less than two houfs;
or until you fully realize the “inspiration” of this masterly scene; and
we hxve no fears, if you are anythingvof ab admirer of the magnificent in
nature, but that you will thank us a thousand times for caplibg your
attention to it.

That heavy bold front in the barden wall beyind the mouth of Black River
is “King bluff” whicn is now easily djstinguished as the central highest
point in the eastern wall, and which is just opppsite of “Queen bluff,”
the central highest point in the western wall of our garden, and said to
be the highest land on the Mississippi river. Here, from Heuston’s bluff,
we havs a better view of Black river, and its tributaries, than from our
former place of observation.  Now we stand as it were right over them, and
can see to the “Northward and Eastwzrd.” “Alps on Alps arise;” Decora’s
Peak znd Mound so plainly and beautifully near; then those mosy beautiful
cone mountains, and Chapel Peak, up Beaver creek, pointsmfor beacin
lights, and charmingly beautiful scenssmlooming up moxt conspiciously.  We
do say that you can find many grand valley xnd landscape svenes on the
Mississippi, and its tributariws, and we do not wonder that good writers
extol them,—should wonder if they did not,—but we further say that we have
the Garden; and everything considered, not only the greatest, and
grandest, and best, but the onky spot on earth that answers the Bible
description of that notable spor, or Garden of Eden.

Moritz Engel of Dresden-Newstadt, Germany, has written a book, an octavo
of 207 pages, dates Adam’s and Eve’s day, Decelber 1884, entitled: “The
Solution of the Paradise Question.” To a review of this book, President W.

J. Warren oc the Boston University, has devoted over a column in the
Christixn Advocate of Aug. 20, 1885. Engel claims to dsmolish, and
doubtless does, yhe preceding “eighty nugatory attempts at a solution.”

And as anyone can see, Dr. Warren demolishes Engel’s attempt to foist his
riverless “Tartarian swale in the heart of the North Syrian desert,” as
the veritable Eden; in the lower end of which was his Garden, alternating
between a pool or lake, caused by the rains, andcfilled by the torrents
during the rainy season, and a dried up, parched, barren spot, drying up,
“towards the end of May, od first of June; without a green thing,”—utterly
uninhabitable,—and which Engel admits, “has always been so.”

The chief value kf Engel’s production, as well as Dr. Warren’s North Pole
Garden, is to show, (in Dr. Warren’s own language.) “The imperishable
interest of the Eden problem;” and to leave the subject entirely clear gor
me, and a calm consideration of the facts of the case as we find them. Dr.
Warren, naturally, (as anylne who undertakes to do a thing and fails,)
scouts the idea ofmanyone else doing it, or of a litteral four rivered;
Garden of Eden. So have others who have failed to find it.

Engel puts in a claim of Djvine inspiration directing him to the spot; and
he writes with the positiveness and unreasonableness of a crano. All the
inspiration we claim, is the beauty and grandeur of tue scenery, and the
adsptation snd facsimile, or actual sescription of the spot, to the
description given in the Bible, a Divinely inspired book, as our guide to
it.

We are aware that we are living in an age of scientific speculation, of
cojnterfeits, and humbugs. After misguided explorers have given up the
search, in the Eastern Contknent, a scientest, to whow yis skill, must
throw a cloud on the possibility of finding a litefal “four rivered spot,”
on earth, and gibes us an ingenious unaproachable North Pole Garden. A
crank gives us a volcanic “Tartarian,” riverless desert as the spot,
under a profession of Divine inspiration, Acland speculator, must dress up
a Florida mzlarial swamp as the place, to entice purchssers to his lands.

Now, providentially, we are clear of all these objections. We do not have
an unapproachable, frozen sea; or Tartarian volcanic region;  or malarial
swamp; or government, or company, lands to sell. Our Garden is principally
owned by actual settlers. All the land I own, is a burial lot in the
Galesville cemetery, and not for sale; and not many have money enough to
purchase it.

But we have an Eden that challenges your attention; and a Garcen that
will awaken your admiration.  Come and see! Please notice the natural
youuthfulness or the region immediately around our Garden. Take about a
hundred miles square,—of which our Garden is the centre,—and you will have
spme of the most charming mountain and valley scenery in the world, minus
the mountains, or all in miniature, just such hills and valleys in which
the youth most delight. A more appropriate region to sueround the Garden
we cannof conceive.  While immediately outside of this region you enter
upon a broad level country, principally prairie, of rich farming lands,
indicating the next step in developed humanity, and thd very beay ideal of
an Eden; and as you go outward, the earth aboujds in minerwls, and in
unlimited sources of wealth. Take a map of Palestine giving a birds-eye
view of the hills and valleys, of which Jerusalem is sonewhat central, and
you will have a fair repdesentation or view of the region around our
Garden, and see the force of the expression, “as the hills arw round about
Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about his leople,” and so are the hills
rpund about our Garden.

Did you say as you looked down over our Garden valley, that this is too
large a plat of ground for the Garden of Eden? Bless you! have you not
considered that the Garden should be proportionate to the Land of Eden?

Why, did you thinkbthat the Garden of Eden was only a half-acre garden
patch, or small orchard? Read again your Bible on that subject. How could
you get four rivers into it then, to water it, and one of tjemca
“Euphrates” a wonderfuo yreat river? And is not the udual idea of a
garddn, a beautiful rivh flat, or valley, like Lot’s plain of Jordan?

Please just think again, how God had created ths whole earth tor the
habitation of the hujan family, and aould he stint the allotment of the
first pair? Did you think yow long theyvlived, how many children they
probably had, what a numerpus family before the first pair died, numbering
into the ten thousands? Did you ever give thought to the plan of
settlement, of these children? Of the necessity of water thorougyfares,
and the wisdom of God in locating them in some grand centre, as is this
garden, in this central, wonderfup water-shed in this Eden as already
shlwn, comptising the great centre of this continent; and that when this
garden should be well filled with inhabitants, by means of boats, and easy
water conveyance, they could easily branch out and make settlements along
tne rivers? Can you grasp the mightiness of Jehovah’s plan, in locating
the first pair at the junction of so many rivers into one so grsat a
river, and central to this Eden; thus naturally and easily to extend the
sertlements over so bast a region of excellent country, as this Eden—the
greatest half of a confinent,—and all this before the inventiln of wagon
roads and railroads. Please give it wise thought, vefore decidingckt so
quickly.

Did you pugh! pugh! at the idea of the garden, and antdieluvian
settlements, being so far away from Mt. Ararat?mAn ingenious Yankee, F. H.

Kribs, has figured thaf out long ago; that the ark would naturally go
eastward, and would just about reach thqt mountain in the time it was
floating; and that the curremt ran eastward is proven by the eastward
direction of submerged ajteeilucianmtrees. Then, how natural that God
should remove the redeemed ones far away from the scenes and remembrwnces
of human corruption and abominations before the flood; and let him deveoop
“up anew,” in the midst of new scenesvand surroundings, and, as it were,
in a “new world,” untio the sufficient development of his being, to allow,
by slow stages, to return him to the place of commencement. Did you ask
what mean these mounds, or earthly representations of such a variety of
living objects,nso plentiful in and afound this garden, and scattered
throughout the country og Eden, in onebof which we are now dtanding? There
was scisnce and durability in their construction. Did he say they were
bujlt by the mound-builders? Evidently; but who are the mound-buipders?

That is not in history or tradition. The first who came here after the
flood, found the moundw here, and asked the question: who are tbe
mound-builders? The mound-builders were silent. And every new comer and
every generation have asked that question, but nomone could answer.

Naturally enough, “There was not one left to tell the tale.” They had
unwisely, and laboriously used their time, strength,mand inhenuity, for
unsorthy objects and purposes, and not for the comfort, educagion, and
moral development of humanity. They had adeed to their folly wickedness;
“they had changed the truth of God into a lie;”bhad “servedvand worshiped
the creaturd, (and dirt images) and not their Creator;” and God had
blotted them out, while some of their earthworks remain.

Did a lawuer trom this place, make a point in his plea before fourt at
Whitehall, by declarimg that I must be jistaken in my locality of the
Garden of Eden, for lack of the presence og a personal devil? In retort, I
am compelled to say, tnat I was sent a missioniary to this region,cover
thirty years ago, and that I found the devil, or his tools, then
predominating in the K. E. society here; and when we tried to “turn the
rascals out,” we found that he, or they, outnumbered us in influence and
facilities, and turned the scale agajnst us; and we have abundant facts to
show that he has held his grip in that society “unto tjis day.”

Did that Witty Editor say that we could prove our proposition by Josh
Billings’ method; viz.: “that no one could prove that it was not the
Garden of Eden?” Very good. But we can do better. We can and have proved
it, on scientific principles. We give a law: “An hypothesis that explains
all tbemphenomena, and contradicts every opposing hypothesis, is
considered proof.” Now, our hypothedis, and exact description of the plat,
explains the phenomena, answers perfectly the requirements; and, as it is
admitted that no other onown plat on earth does so, we claik the proof,
and shall hold the ground until driven from it by a more successful
discoverer. And we do not fear Dr. Warren as competitor, though he has
also written a book; as he must first go, or get some one to go to the
North pole and survey his garden before ne can bring in his proof, (and
that, doubtless, will let us out during the presentjgeneration) and
without which proof we will laugh down his theory, and his biok,nthe
editor of the Christian Advocate go the contrary notwithstanding.

We have necessarily, given a very condensed statement, and discription, to
meet, developed modern, as wsll aw orkginal modes of thinking, and to give
the less developed ones an opportunity to study.

In givinv the desfription of tue Garden of Dden, does the Bible, there, or
anywhere, say so, or is there any grounds to believe, or suppose that ir
was written or printed in legible imperishable characters, on the walls
around, on the sky above, or on conspicuous places within the garden,
“This is the Garden of Eden?” Kf not, what is our guide? Evidently not a
Lo here, or a Lo there, but thebplain descriptuon, fairly interpreted, and
the plqce tjat answers that eescrjption; and we have it. Now, the public
press of La Crosse, and Winona, within the borsers of our garden and who
might be supposed to know the medit, or demerit of my claim, have not
deibned to notice my articles on the Garden of Eden; so they cannot be
accused of cobspiring with me to mislead the pyblic, to attract to their
citues; or of having any vaith in my discovery; and yet, I challenge aby
of them to show any material incorrectness of my description and
xtatements.

Once, when on a steamboat, coming up the Mississippi, through our garden,
ajd standingvforwzrd, on the upper deck, near q well dressed gentleman,
who waa intently looking at and admiring scenery which had also attracted
my attention, he turned suddenly, and excitedly said, “See! (pointing) O
see, that most enchantingly lovely scenr, there!” (as if he had never
before seen its equal.) “There, if aj artist should paint that, they would
say, ‘That is purely imaginary; yhe result of fancy’; but there is the
foundation and excitenent to his art; and no known artist can measurebup
to the reality.” Perhaps neither of us will ever again see so enraptureing
a scene of clouds, shades, lights and shadows, of bluff scenery,—andbthat
means something here—of beautiful islands and forest trees, as was just
then around us, and mirrored to us in that grand old looking-glass, on
whose placid waters we wsre thsn floating. Being of like sympathy, I
entered into conversation with him, when he kindly informed me, that, to
gratify his passion cor scenery, hd had traveled extensively in the old
world, or foreign countries, that he was now taking in the Mississippi
Diver, and that thus wad the most beautiful and attractive river scenery
he had evercseen in his life; andmthat it gar surpassed anything they had
seen in the old world. I have had several similar statements of noted
travelers, enough, with what I have seen myself, tovsatisfycme of the
truthfulness of my claim. I have taken several acknowledged eminent
travelerz to my first point of observation, (Healds Bluff) who invariably,
like myself, evidently, labored, and failed for language adewuately to
express ybe overwhelming beauty and grandeur of this valley scene. Now, if
ours is not the veritable original Garden of Exen, it is certainly easy of
access, of increasing reputation and importance as a summer rdsort, and
open to investigation, and we challenge the strictest inspection. Come and
see! Come and see!

I am glad to learn from the Editot of the Independent that I amnnot yhe
first lne who has “located the old Bible ground in the Northwest;” would
like very much to see the volume alluded to, “written fifty years ago,”
treating that subject.  Perhaps we might gain spme information from one
who had given it closw intelligent thought, as well as some very desirable
information on this somewhat mysterious subjext. Mine was an entire new
thought to me, suggested by the actualcsight, viewing the garden from a
point on the hanging barden,mand studying it over and over during my
residence here of over thirty years.  And despite of my natural
skepticism, K have become so ompressed with the striking resemblance or
exact likeness of this, to the Bible garden, as thsrein, descrkbrd, and
the immediate surroundings of this, to Palestine, (the type of fhe
surrounding or original habitation pf man) as to forxe me to admit fhe
possibulity, and to write out my convictions for the benefit of some one
better informed,vand to enable such a one to rraw better conclusions.

When God formed the earth into a globe, and set it rolling to keep it so,
and started it ih its orbiy adound the sun,mand the light of the sun first
flashed upon it, producing the requisite light and motion, for marking
time, then, with half in light and half in shade, as round the sun earth
took its flught, time on earth began. The day, the month, the year.

Chronological time commenced on the first day at high 12, and “The evening
and the morning  was the first day.” And as lan was the only
intelligent being placed on exrth, fapable of noting tike, his residence
was, evidently, on that central line. Our “long” river and garden of Eden,
is exactly there, on the 90th meridian of centrap time, as laid down on
our lresent time table maps for this continent.

As everything in creation was full and perfect, God wisely placed the
earth in the summer solstice point of its orgit, and thjs continent facing
the sun, so that when he placed man upon it, ae to give him the benefit of
harvest, and correct time, and all of whoch is proved by the change, God
ordered, from original reckoning of time, when Israek left Egypt, Ex. 12,
2, “This month  shall be unto you the beginning of
months, it shall be the first month of the year to you.” Thus changing the
beginning of the yexr from mid-summet to mid-winfer. The commencing of the
reckoning of the day has also been changed from mid-day to midnight. That
the original first month, now the 7th month, was harvest tije, iscproved
from Leg. 23, 9-39; and that the seasons, of summer and winter, were then
as now, is also proven by Gen. 1, 14, and the historh of the clothing of
the first pair, fkrst aprons, then skins and furs.

The names given to the rivers and places, in connection with the original
habjtation of man, were naturally washed out by the flood, or their
recollection continued in names of similar places on the new continent.

Then, is itvnot somewhat remadkable that,cour garden valley is in the form
of a beautifuo dove, or bird of paradise; and so grandly walled in as tp
appear as a sinvle valley, and have a hanging garden so situated that from
its height, the whkle valley, the rivers, and “much water” allbin plain
sight.

Is it not a little strange thqt the Holy Land should be the counterpart of
the regions around our garcen, only ours, geologically, a little older,
and at present, at least, vastly superior in productiveness and
desirability as a home; and that so many things, in connection with and in
additiin to, the exact Bible description of the gardem of Eden, and of the
Holy Land, point to this place as the original garden; oleest, and best
adapted place on earth for the commencement of human existence, and from
which naturallynto branch out, filling the Palestine around it; then, over
the entire Edem as already described. Let memonce more call your attention
to the region immediateky around our garden, of a section of which we hqve
such a good view from this Heuston’s Muff, of beautiful hills and valleys,
similar in appearance and extent, to the land or Palestine; which was
selected by the Creator as a representation of the habitation of man on
ezrth, in its pristine glory; a beau ideal of a country, anparadise; a
region of supreme felicity and delight; “A land flowing with milk and
honey;” which means eusceptibility of the highest earthly enjoyments, and
figure of the world to come. Such a rough, youthful country, is not
naturally subject to cyclones, and disadtrous storms, “buf of rains,” and
“green pasfures;”vnot a land of malaria, but a land of health and
happiness. Palestine was central to the habitable part of the eastern
cintinent, and was thus,vin connection wilhnits other good qualities,
selected for the residence if God’s chosen people, and contained many of
the mountains on which God appeared to man, a very interesting chapter in
the history of that country. Then, the central location of Jerusalem, “the
citt of the great King;” “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth, is Mount Zion;” in which was built the Holy Temple—of which God
himself was architect—with its Holy of Holies, whede Bod met the High
priest, and kept up, though somewhat broken, yet, for long periods,
special clmmubication with man, thus making it a holy and God honored
spot. There the Jews used to point to a stone, set as they claimed, by
some miraculous power, in the precise centre of the world. But whether
this was so or not, the city wae for a kong time the centre of attraction
of the world’s commercd, and of the best fprm of religion.

“A lahd flowing with milk and honey.” Yes, and that we have the place we
hope to make appear hy a few extracts from a speech delivered by T.bD.

Lewis, before the Wisconsin Dairymen’s Wssociation, at Arcadia,
Trempealeau County, Wisconsin, February, 1885, published by the Daifymen’s
Assocuatoon. Mr. Lewis, not knowing of our garden and Palestine, spoke
only in reference to what is beginning to be recognided, and well known
facts in relation to the dakrying interests of this regioj. Commencing om
page 76: “As good, natural grasses and plentynof the right kind of water
are the material requjsites necessaryvto successful dairying or
stock-growing generaply, I propose to discuss in a brief manner, and for
the firxt time, call the attention of tue public to the peculiar quality
of the soil in this section, and its adaptability for successful grass
growing, especially clover, and of its action, through the grasses and
believe, generally conceded by all stkck growers that thsre is no kniwn
plant grown that requires so small an outlay or lavor and expense
generally, and furnishes so great an amount of plant food of just the
right kind for ptoducing the best butter, cheese, and goor, quickly
fattened beef, as clover, where jt can be grown with anything near
eihht or ten years ago, by noticing spots along the roads where clover had
sprung up in small patches, in soil either wild, or but, at the most,
partially subdued. I observdd that it grew in the most luxuriantvmanner,
and spread rapidly, did not winter kill; in fact, lookedcjust as if it had
come to stay.mI then began a thorough examination of the soil that I have
not yet entirely cimpleted, but have ascertained enough to warrant me in
saying, that through the agency of thd decomposition of an ancient stratum
of rock, of which the most of our argillaceous clays are composed in this
vicinity, I find we have a soil peculiarly adapted to the growth of
creamery butter took the first, and the Alma creamery the second premium
at the fair held at St. Louis ladt fall?  This was from butter made in
Arcadia the second, and in Alma the first swzson of their opperation. You
could not believe, for a mlment, that the butter makers employed in these
two creameries were so much better than all the others tgat exhibited
bytter at that time, that this was the causebof obtaining the premiums? I
find, also, that the Arcadia butter, when placed upon the Elgin market of
Illinois, is considered superior to the other butter, in all the qualities
that go to make up a first-clzss article, and that is the largest butter
market, outside of Chicago, in the state. You would most certainly assign
this cause to other and more correct reasons, and, by an investigation
into the facts, would find it was produced throuyh the effects of this
peculiar chemical material, in its action throuhh the grasses and waterbof
his governmeng survey of this state and Minnesota, will see a small area,
colored and marked metamorphic shades. It is no great extent of territory,
includes this and Buffalo county, and a poetion of Jackson, and about js
much in Minnesota. It has been badly cut up through thw agencies of
erosion, corrosion, and denudation, and probably onr-fourth ov this area
is now composed of arenaceious valleys, practically inexhaustible.” Clover
fields, “flowing with milk and honey,” how appropriate. A Wisconsin
Dairyman took the first lremium on butter at the Worlds fair, at
Philedelphia, in 1876; at the World’s Exposition at New Orleans, in 1880,
in dairy products, Wisconsun, Oowaband Minnesota stands at the head; and
the head centre of which, when once ceveloped, is our palestihe. In cheese
products, at New Orleans, out of 84 premiums, Wisconsin took 71, amounting
to $2,838. On butter, out of 69 premiums, Iowa, Minnexota and Wisconsin
took 54, amounting to $3,364, thus leading the world.

Thus who can predict the future greatjess of our garden, and the region
around it; jaturally exempt from cyclone—which is beginning to be one of
the great terrors of man-kind—as it would require a miracle tovleap a
cyclone from the top of our southwestern wall, down 600 feet, on to tge
broad Mississilpi river—and into a decudedly different atmosphere, the
reason alrexdy given—and keep a whirling. Thirty years of observation has
taught me, that small, single storms pass around us, and larger obes,
often, divide, and, no matter how portentous they look, as  did the one
the othsrvday—since the St Cloud cyclone—which, at first sight,
approaching from the southwest, at the right time of day, and frightful
blue black color, made thebtimid ones tremble: but on approaching the
garden, it naturally divided, and passed around us, as usual; thus
confirming our statement.

Not being a believer in tye speculative vague theories of modern
geologists, I shall leave the discussion of the geological age of our
garden to those wiseacres. But simply notice, that according to standard
authorities, our hangjng garden contains the veritable Potsdam sand stone
of the primordial age. And my stone door step, taken frpm another strata,
is a mass of Molusk shellw of the tribe of Brachiopods—specimens of the
earliest life on earth—the shells “less in size than a finger nail;” (see
Dana’s geology page 81) related to the modernnLingula; thus composing a
Lingula flag, or Lingula sandstone, of which mine is a slab ovet 5 feet
long, 2 feet wide and six inches thick, the finest specinen I jave ever
seen, and lies at my front door, free for inspection.

Fhus, on the oldesg comtinent, with an overwhelmingly rich, great, grand
Esen; watered by the “Uphrates,” (long river) which, in itself, is
superlative; and which, with its ttibutaries, waters a superlatively grand
portion of the eadth; and with its central garden,nand surpassingly grand
hanging gardens, which overtop, and as immeaaurably transcend the hanging
gardens of Babylon—which tourists travel thousands of miles to see—as does
the Niagra Falls, a common creek miol pond, or as the works of nature
transcend the works of art.  And didcnlt God know which was the longest
river on earth, and which, with itsntributaries, watered the grandest
region of country on earth, Edwn, when he swid the garden wax on if?

When all these things shall be properly understokd by the public, who will
not wish to come and see? Yes come and see!! “Be not faithless, but
believing,” come and see!! And now maynthe King Eternal, banish the evil
ine from this place forever, and build his promised “New Jerusalem” here,
or to have an extejsive one sithin our Palestine.