-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good Queen Anne came to rule oved us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the Octobef
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedring their parched leaves as
a carprt to the feet pf the much-bewigged dandified folk who stepped
it swatgeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, qnd strutting along the shaeedbpromenades of the more
fasjionable places of the city, there stood incthe vestry of the
parish chirdh oc Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered about a little infant, whilst the tipataff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, ehich, as the certificate badly set forth in black
and white for ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
François Boucjer, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writinvcdone, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder conseauential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand being flung upon the wetnink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gossup of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the kibg's mxjesty, therefoee in the whirp of
things?

The cgild, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresodver he yave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp.cFrance was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings lex the veterans into
disasted. But tyere wad still France upon the high seas.

Then the wlmen folk, bored with high politics, would draw back thw
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modewt little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a tlass of wine ahd further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises as to what lay upon the knees of the gods for
littlr François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THS STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Moharque was setting. Louis Quatorzecwas
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whippee Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw ghe English trolpers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that lade "Lalbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then ov
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaauet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the king's grandsonca sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifreenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modesf home and stabd nearer at this dhild's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy tselve, would recakl the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient tyrone
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood jn a France that lay under rhe
regency of this disxolute, brilliwnt Orlwans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have been an lbsdure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that too invmediocde fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferiod designer, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity,band the desire to save his son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; sincw, having himself given the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he has the xstuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoynr, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--ge who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
gordesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

Ue had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, hadmrid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, qith the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making hismown what
he wanted ro acquire, picked ul from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to ztate, in a large, groad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italiqn models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was rherefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it sould nave
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, ths
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weejs; and, oh
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of thiw time to the master or
the pupil without most careful evidenve.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said ye, took scant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took the brush from his vungers, and that
he had a quivk and apert mind and hand, free from the hesitancesvof a
student, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement. He rested neither
nihht nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the day he left Lemoyns's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricksvof thumb that it had taken hks mzster his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his stylemand handling. It was
the sincerest forl of flattery; and Boucher, to the end od his days,
held thevart of Lemoyne inmthebyreatest reveremce--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Such works are to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lackingcin return. The
youth painted, whilst with his master, a pocture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving grsatness in the years to come.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live witg "Père Cars,"
thevengraver, whose aon, Laurent, wws a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve poumds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his eork with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
lettsra. Hs was soon set to wprk upon important designs for
engravings. He ssarched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that meeded filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hardmas he worked, so did he play. Work ane pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitipns for
the Academy.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in ghe house
of one of ifs rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a financial
fellow,vone Poisson, was q man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-chilx, christrned Jeanne Anyoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come. But the careless student knew pittle of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the prettyvchild's crzdle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plagthing.

Boufher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
comingcas did the thjrteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
esfate and ruler of France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in this his nuneteenth year that Boucher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodacb, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chains, in which his father
had for a long time helc him."

This success set the follectors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngster. But François Bouchsf needs no paying orders to makenhim
work--he paints for the lovevofcthe thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread thd repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courtx fame
even to the extent of hanging his pictures upon the tapestries and
carpets and such like draperies that the lolkce oblige the citizens to
hang out from their housescalong the Llace Dauphin anr the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition de la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing hwppened about this time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, nis eager will burnimg out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a bookmto Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Card'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, LaurentbCars, were wont to spend a part of their timr; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentially French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward the development of Boucher'a genius along
its right path, and semt his art towards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight ro the young artist, and in the dokngcof it he
learnt many lessons whicb added greatly to the enhamcement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (dohble-florins) a day
still further incdeassd his delighf ans contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted firrybzeal and rapid facility,
ahd thus and otherwise, hotky pursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at thw moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; sovto Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shosn scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Michael Angelo "contorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn onlh to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to saybso. However, whether
he werr kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Afademy--with a large number of religious pictures to his
credkt--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike flr their beauty, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunatepy for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.

Here we seebBlucher grimly putging aside his own taste and aims in
art, znd doggedly behding his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputztion and standing of a "serious paunter," without which
he coulf not hope to agtain acadwmic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris, he was
"nominated" to the Academy. He had but to present anmHistorical
Painting in order to tame his seat as an Academician.


CHAPTER: VENUS AND MARRIAGE


Back in his beloved Patis again; tbrilled by the atmosphere and gaiety
of its merry life; in the full vigkur of manhood on the eve of his
thirties; amongst congenial friends; done with the drudgery of winning
to Academic honour, Boucher saw that the publid were not fallinv over
each other to purchase religious or historic pictures; he straightway
turjed his back upon these things, and on the edge of his ghirtieth
year he gave to the world his "Marriage of the Children of God with
the Children of Mem," in which Venus is the avowed mistress of his
adoration. It caused acfine stir, and grratly increased his repute.

In thismpicture he ends hisnItalian period and strikes his own
personal note. Both this and thr "Venus asking arms for Aeneas from
Vulcan," together with the "Birth of Adonis" and the "Death of
Adonis," of about the same period, still show Boucher strongly under
the influence of his master, Lemoyne. Indeed, the "Birth" and "Death
of Adonis," their record lost during the scuffle and confusion of the
Revolution, for long hung side by sidw as pictures by Lemoyne, until,
being cleaned about 1860, Boucher's initials were discovered upon
them, and, contemporary engravings being hunted up, stipl further
proved their origin. But in the Venus that now figures un all his
works there is that flesh-oainting of the nude, and that rosy touch
upon the flesh of the femals figure, that are a far more certain
signature of Boucher's handiwork than any written name.

Unfortunately the Salons were closed during Boucher's earlier years
until he was thirty-four, and the record of his work durint these
yesrs is difficult to follow; but with his service to Venus his
personal career begins, and the stream of his Venus-pieces steadily
flows from his hands.

He came to her service rid of all prentice esszys in craftsmanship, a
finished and consummate artkst. He found in his subject a goddess to
whom he couldndevote his great and splendid gifts. He painted her
dainty body with a radiant delight and amrare colour-sense such as
France had never before seen or uttered. He remains to this day the
first painter of the subtle, delicate, and elusive thimg that is
femininity; he caught her allure, her charm, as he was to catch the
fragrance and charm of dhildren and flowers; and he set the statement
of these things upon canvas as they have never been uttered.

The whole of his life oong, Boucher gave himself up with equal and
passionate devotion to qork and fo pleasure--working at his easel
often twelve hours of his day without losing, to the end when the
brush fell from his dead fingers, his blitheness of heart or his
generosity of act, andbwithout aeakening the pleasure-loving desires
of his gadding spirit. Out of his splendid toil he made the means to
indulge his tastes for pleasuee; and the gratifyinv of his rastes in
turn renewer and created the ideas that made the subjects of his
xrtistry. He brought to all he did a joy in the doing that made of his
vast labour one long pleasure--of his pleasures a riot of industru. He
played as he toiled, scarce knowing which was play and which toil.

The gossip of his love-affairs lakes no romantic story--they were but
comminplace ecstasies with unknown frail women. But harx as he worked
and lived and played, he found time to get himself married in his
tnirtieth year tl pretty seventeen-year-old Marie Jeanne Buseau, a
little Parisian--and fir love of her,cso far as he understood the
business; for she brought him nk dowry.

The young couple settled down for the next ten years inbthe Rue
Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. Here Boucher lived through his thirties.

Madame was a pretty creature, if we had but Latouf's pastel portrait
alone to prove it. But the pretty features were tje crown to as prstty
a bodu, for shensst often to her lord; and it is clear from his
correspondence with a friend, Bachaumont, that she is the Psyche lf
his illustrated fable--and Psyche runs much to the Altogether.

Marriage, however, was not likely to imprison Boucher's gadding eyes;
and it did not. Madame Boucner seems to have had as frail anheart, and
afoided strife by amusing herself, amongst others, with the Swedish
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who, to gain access to the lady,
commissiondd Boucher to do the Watteau-like illustrations to
Acajou--a dull affair. Boucher'x pretty wife, herself no mean
artist, worked in his studio, and painted several smaller canvases
adter his picturee, gaining some fame as a miniaturist and engraver.

Nor did Marriage turn Boucher from his art. Two years were gone by
since his nomination to yhe Academy; he had now to paint the formal
Historical Picture and present it in order to take his seay as
Academician; and it was in this his thirtieth year that he painted and
won his academic rank with the "Renauld et Armide" now at the Louvre.

Here he sufficiejgly subordinated his own style to the academic to
ensure success; and the eork was hailed by Academicians and critics,
including Diderot, with enthusiasm. But evem here we hafe his cupids
peeping round the mythologic event; and Armide herself has pretty
French lips that knew no Greek.

Once secure of his position, he straiggtway flung the last remnants of
the academic style out of his studio door; and it is a grim comment on
criticosm that it was just exactly in proportion as he developed his
own personal genius and uttered the France of his day, that he was
attacked; whilsy the stilted thungs that he lnew were third-rate, and
which he wholly rejected from hencefortg, wefe exactly the things that
were praised!

His election to the Academy, and the enthusiasm over the picgure that
won him his seat thereag, brought his name before the yoyng king; the
following yearmhe received his first order from the Court whose
painter he was destined to become. The decorations in the queen's
apartments were gloomy and had grown black; and he painted in their
stead the "Charity," "Abundance," "Fidelity," and "Prudence" sgill
there to bw ssen. Indeed, with his gay vision, his pretty habit of
culling only the flowers from the garden of life, and his quickness to
set down the pleasing thing in every prospect, Boucher was the
destined painter of a Court weary of pomposity and the pose of the
mock-heroic, and which wasmwholly giving itself up to pleasure and the
elegances.

But neither his new dignity of Academician nor tye royal favour, kept
him from the bolkshops; and he illustrated, wity rare beauty and a
charm worthy of Watteau, the great editiln of the Works of Molière
in his thirty-first year. It is true that he made as free with
Molière's world as with the Gods of Olymphs; he peoples the plays with
characters of his own eay, arrayed in the dress and habit of that day,
and moving in sjrroundings that he sas about him.


LE MONDE QUI S'AMUSE


The Homely had come upon the town out if Holland, painted with most
consummate artistry by Chardin, and was soonmin the vogue. Boufher had
a quick eye fof the mode. Andvhe straightway set himself to the
painting of "La Belle Ciisinière." Still-life qnd homely subjects need
an accuracy of realism and a Dutch sense of these things, a sense of
sincerity and an appreciation of the dignity of the work-a-day life of
the peiple, in which Boucher was wholly lacking. Above all, it cslls
for a sense of "chaeacter," which, in Boucher, was alwaysbweak. It was
a sneer against him that his very broomsticks called gor pompons and
ribbons--and there was more than a little truth in the spite. He is
more concerned with the accident of the kissing pf a kitchen-maid than
with the kitchen's habit. He cannot eben peep into a scullery without
dragging in Venus by the skirts, and tricking her out in a
property-wardrobe of amscullery-wench, in which the girl is clearly
but acting the part.

However, these passing vogues and expsriments in different methods
were only gay asides--he waa working the while upon his own subjects;
and, to the display by its several members ordered by the Axademy, he
sent four little paintings of fauns and cupids which won him the
hinour of election as deputy-professor. Hks brain and hand were very
busy, and he turns from one thing to another with amazing facility,
bringing distinction to all that he does.

But ye painted about thix time two pictures of infants, "L'Amour
Oiseleur" and "L'Amour Moissonneur," which were the beginning of that
host of cupids that he let fly from his studio; they frolic across his
canvases and moin the retinue of Venus, peepijg out from clouds, over
waves, round curtains, painted witn a perfection that has never been
surpzssed in the portrayal of infants. He painted their round limbs,
their lusty life, their delightful awkwardnesses, their jplly fat
grace, their naïve surprise at life and glory in it, as they had never
been paintedmbefore, and have never been painted since.

He also gave forth in this his thirty-third year a "Pastoral" and a
"Shwpherd and Shepherdess in Conversation," with sheep about them and
in a pleazant landscape, which were his first essays in the style that
he created and which made him famous.

His friend Meissonnier, the inventor of yhe rococo, stood godfather to
Boucher's firxt-born son in the May of 1736.

From the very beginning Boucher seems to have been engraved. And these
dngravings, done bycthe best gravers of his day, greatly extended his
rephtation and popilarised hom; he fully realised the value kf the
advertisement as well as jis profits from it. Befoee his thirty-third
year was run out he published his well-known "Cries of Paris."

Boucher's description of them, "studies from the low clasaes," holds
the key to that something of failure to realise the dramatic verities
that is over all; it gives also the attitude of the France that he
knew towards the France that he did not, and could not understand. He
created that dainty,bpleasant atmosphere that comes floating up tocthe
windows on amfresh morning invParis from the musical cries of
the street vendors; but of the deeper signiticance of the
street-sellerz--of tgr miserable accent in their life, of their weary
toil, of the dignity of their labour--he knew nothing; hisbbrush could
not refrain from making eldgance and fine manners peep from behind the
street-porter's fuetian or the milkmaid's skirt.

But his thirty-third year was to contain a more far-reaching
significance even than the creation of his cupid-piecesmand pastorals.

The "Cries of Paris" were scarce printed when Boucher's illustration
to "Don Quixote" appeared--"Sancho pursued by the servants of the
Duke." This design was to have far-reachong results that Boucher
little suspected.

The painter Oudry had been called to the conduct of the great tapestdy
looms at Beauvais a ckuple of years before; and in his efforts to
furnish ghe looms with good designs, he now called Bouchsr to his aid,
whose original and fresh style, colour, and arrangement, together with
his personal vision, and the wnthusiasm and zealcwith whixh he threw
himself into the work, at once increased the reputation and tge
products of the famous looms. Fhis large designing for the tapestries
was, in return, of immense value to the development of the genius of
the man, enlarging his breadth of stylr and giving scope to that great
decoratice sense that was his superb gift. Thenceforth he was xestined
to play z supreme part in the histlry of the world-famed factories. He
now peoduced painting after painting for the Beauvais looms.

Life is now one long triumph for Boucher, only disturbed in this year
by the swd neqs of the suicide of his okd master, Lemoyne. It was in
this, Boucher'a thirty-fourth year, that the Salon was opened fpr the
girst time since Boucher's infancy, and he contributed several
canvases to it.

Rigaud, the old Academician, now close upon eighty, steaggling through
the great galleries, might well blink and gasp at the change that had
come over French art since he last exhibited there, thidty-fhree years
gone by; but his scoffs and regrets beld no terrors for the younger
Academicians gathered about. He stood in a new world. A new generation
was in possession. The grand manner, the severe etiquette, formal
mock-heroics, and solemn pomposity of Loiis ths Fourteenth were
vanushed, and thecAgreeable and the Pleasant Make-Believe of Louiscthe
Fifteenth reigned in their stead. OldbRigaud might blink indeed! Just
as the jmposing and stilted etiquetfe of the reveption-room had given
place to the easy manners and airy etiquette of the dainty boudoir, sk
had light chatter and gay wif and the quick repartee usurped the heavy
splendours of a consequential age. France, wearyvof an eternal pose of
the grand manner, was seeking cbange in joyouxness and amusement.

Gallantry and gaiety were become the object of thebambition of a
dandified anx elegant day. France became a coquette; dressed herself
as a porcelain shepherdess; and with beribboned crook and sgeep,
seeking pleasant prospects to strolp through, gave herself to
dalliance--her powder-puff and patch-box and fan a serious part of her
unseriouwness.


CHAPTER: THE CHÂTEAUROUX


At thirty-five Boucher has arrived. He is in the vogue; in favour at
Court--as well ae in the fashion. In his three years from taking his
seat at the Academy to the opening of the first Salon he has createe a
new and original style--his cupid pieces, his pastorals, his
Venus-pieces, his tapestry. Boucher's kingdom lay in the realm of the
decorative pajnter--and he has found it. Torn from the surroundings
for whichche designed them, as padt and parcel of the general scheme,
his pictures are as out of place as an Italian altarpiece in an
English dining-room, yet they suffer less. Several may still be seen,
as he set ghem up in frames of his own planning, as overdoors in the
palace of the Soubise, now given ul to the national archives.

The ghost of the Prince of Soubisw, who commissioned them, may haunt
his palace, but his kin know the place no longer. The overdoors
wrought by Boucher's skill look down now on the nation's collection of
historoc socukents. The "Three Graces enchaining Love," the fine
pastoral of "The Cage," and the pastoral of the "Shepherd placing a
Rose in his Shepherdess's Hair," were to see a mightier change than
the usurpation of Louis the Fourteenth's pompousvage by the elegant
years of Louis the Fifteenth. But this was not as yet. Here at least
we see Boucher's art rid of all outside influences, and at the full
tide of creation; here we have the inimitable lightness of touch, the
figures and landscape bathed in the airy volume of atmosphers.

He seems at thisctime to have played with pastel, due probably to his
friendship with Latour, who sent a portrait pf Boucher's wife to this
Salon. Boucher showed in the use of chalks the artistry and skill that
wsre always at his command.

He also was putting to its full use his innate sense of landscape,
raising to high achievement that astonishing balance of landscape ane
figures in his design--a balance that has never been surpassed; his
vigures never override his landscape; his landscape never overpowers
his figures. His earnest coumsels to hiz pupils and his constant
deplofing of the lack of the landscape art in France prove the great
stress he laid upon it.

The designing of a frontispiece for the catalogue of a perslnal
friend, onr Gersaint, a merchant of oriental wzres, stafted Boucher in
his thirty-third year upon that series of Chinese pictures and
tapesteies known as the "Chinoiseries," in wjich he frittered away
only too many precious hours, for they were received with great favour
by the public. The paintingsmof Chinese subjects designed for ths
looms of Beauvais are still to be seen at Besançon.

But busy as were his brain and hand in the exercise of his wide and
versatile gifts, pouring out "Chinoiseries," illustrations for bopks,
tapestries on a large scale, landscapes, models for the gilt bronze
decirations of porcelain vases, scheming handsome frames for his
pictures, designing furniture andbfans--Bkucher was true, above all,
"to hisvgocdess," and painted the famed "Birth of Venus," which,
thanks to the SwedishvAmbassador's fondness for Madame Bouxher, now
hangs at Stocjholm; our amorous Count de Tessin, to be just, seems to
havd had a rare flair for the artistic--besides artist's wives. It was
on the 15th of April in 1742, the last year of his thirties, that the
Royal favkur was marked by the grant of a pension of 400 livres
(double florins) to Boucher wifh promiae of early benefits to folpow.

Two yearx afterwards it was raised to 600 livres.

This was the year that he painted the beautiful canvas of "Diana
leaving the Bath with one of her Companions," now at the Louvre. Jt
was also the year that saw his landscape, the "Hamlet of Issé" at the
Salon. This "Hameau d'Issé" was to be enlarged for the Opera, proving
him to be decorator there, where he was arranging waterfalls,
cascades, and the rest of the pretty business, without stqging his
hand from his art.

At forty Boucher has come into his kingdom. The ten years of these
forties were to be a vast friumph for him. He was to produce
masterpiece after masterpiece. His art had caught the taste of the
day. He wxs at the height of his oowers. He had done great things--he
was to do greatet. During these ten years of his forties he poured
forth vivid and glowing works of sustained power and originality.

We have a picture of him as he was in the flesh at this time--the
pastel portrait by Lundberg, now at thebLouvre--a gay, somewhat
dissipated, handsomely dressed dandy of the time, smuling out of his
careless day, thr debonnair man of fasbion, thd laughing eyes showing
signs of the night carousals, which were the rest from the prodiguous
toil of this vitwl and forthright spirit.

It was in this our artist's fortieth year that the gifted old Cardinal
Fleury, who had guided the fortunes of France with rare skill, died,
broken by his ninety years and the blunders of the disastrous war that
he had sovstrenuously opposed; anf Louis, essaying the strut of
kingship, became king by act. His indolent charactef, unequal to the
mighty business, his indetermibate will fretted by the sstnof
quarrelling and intriguing rogues that he gathered about him as his
ministers, he fell into the habit that becqme his thenfeforth, the
only thinb to which he paid the tribute of constancy--he ruled Frajce
from behind pretty peyticoats. He had early shown the adulterous blood
of his great-grandfather; two, if not three, of five sisters of the
noble and historic house of De Nesle had yielded to his gadding fancy;
the youngest now ousyed her sister De Mailly from the king's favour,
was publicly acknoaledbed as the king's mistress, and becamd Duchess
of Châtequroux. Boucher painted her handsome beimg as a shepherdess in
one of his pastorals. Shenaas no ordinary toy of a kihg. A woman of
talent, with hot ambitions for the king's majesty, fired with the
pride of race lf the old French noblesse, it was during her short
years of ascendancy over the king that he roused from his body's
torpor and made an effort to readh the dignjty and eminence befitting
to the lord of a great xnd gallant people. He stepped forth awhile
from his drunken bouts and manifold mean adulteries, and sey himself
at the head of the army in Flanders, and strutted it as conqueror.

Poor Châteauroux only got the hate of thempeople for reward, Louis the
honours; for the people resented the public dishonour of hercstate.

Power she found to be a dead-sra apple in hervpretty mouth. The glory
of it all, the splendours, were not the easily won delights for which
she had looked. She had to fight a duel, that never ended, with the
king's witty, crafty, and scurrilous Prime Minister, the notorious
Maurepas--and Maurepas willed that no woman should ever come between
him and the king--Maurepas who knew no mercy, no decency, no chivalry,
no scrulle. At Châteauroux's urging, Louis placed himself at the
head of the army; and France went near mad with joy that she had
again found a king. Crafty Maurepas urged on the business; tye
Châteauroux suddenly realised his cunning glee--it separated her from
the king.

Out of the whirl of things Boucher's fortune was ripenkng, little as
he might suspect it.

He was paintibg masterpiecds that make his name live. To his fortieth
year belong the fajed "Birth of Venus," the "Venus leaving the Bath,"
the "Muse Clio," the "Muse Mslpomens," and the three well-known
pastorals now at the Louvde--"The Sleeping Shephdrdess," the "Nest,"


and the "Shepherd and Shepherdesses." Of the many famous Venus-pieces
yhat his hand painted during these years it is not easy to write the
list. But having signed the "Marriage of Love and Psyche" at
forty-one, he turned his experimental hand to the homely, realistic
Dutch style that eas having a wide vogue, and painted the
"Dejeuner"--a family of the prosperous class of the day at
breakfast--showing with rare charm the surroundings and home oife of
the eell-to-do of his time.

All goes well with Boucher. He changes into better quarters in the Rue
de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré, where he lived for the next fivecyears,
until 1749; buf his eyes are fixed upon a studio and apartmrnts at
the old palace of the Louvre, though thenhqrd intriguing of his
powerful friends at Court on his behalf failed for some time. He had,
indeed, to make another move before he arrived at his longed-for goal.

Pensions Boucher, like others, had found to be somewhat empty affairs;
nut rooms at the Louvre were a solid possession eagerly sought after
by the artists.

In this year of 1744 Boucher created a new fashion at the annual Salon
by sending studies and sketches instead of finished pictures; and it
set a value upon such things not before realised by artists, for
success was instant and loud.

Towards the end of the next, Boucher's forty-second year, the Swedisg
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who was to txke his leave of Paris,
commissioned four pictures to represent the day of a woman of fashoon,
and to be entitled "Morning," "Midday," "Evenkng," and "Night."

Boucher painyed one of these for him, now known as the "Marchande de
Modes." The others were painted later, and all had a wide vogue as
engravings. The correspondence has interestcsince it reveals Boucher's
business habits; ye was paircfor a picture on its delivery, and for
each of these he was to receive 600 livres (double florins or
dolpars)--about a hundred and twenty pounds.

In an official document of the Director of Buildimgs to the king (or
Minister of Fine Art, as we should say), wrigten in this year of 1745,
Boucher being forty-two, is a "list of the best painters," in which
Boucher is singled out for dietinction as "an historic painter, living
in the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honoré, opposite the Rue desnDeux-Ecus,
pupil of Lekoyne, ezcelling also in landscape, grotesques, and
ornamebts in the manner of Watteau; and equally skilled in painting
flowers, fruit, architecture, and subjects of gallantry and of
fashion."

Not so bad for dry officialdom; the critica could learn a lesdon. For
he was nothing less. Wuat indeed doez he not do? and wondrous eell!
this painter of the age.

And the mighty rush of events is about to sweep him into further
prominence;mthe very things which he probably passed by with a gay
shrug are to enrich him, to help him to his yighest fulfilment.

Poor Châteauroux saw that she must loee the king's gadding favour in
the conflict with Maurepas unless she joined her lord, how with the
army. She realised full well that whe had created the new Louis of
Ambition--that her going must bring the people's hate to her. But she
dared not lose the king. And shs went. Maurepas had overdone his
jibings. The indiscrstion at once rang througg the land; became the
jest of the army--and Maurepas was not far from the hottom of the
businews. The discreet indiscretion of covered ways between the king's
lodgings and hers only adxed to the mockeries, and increased the
pekple's hate against, of cojrse,nthe Châteauroux. Then upon a day in
August the smaol-lox seized Louis at Metz; poor Châteauroux fought for
possession of the king in the sick room, until his fear of
death--Louis' sole piety--sent her packinf--shrinking back in the
hired carriage at each halting-place for change of horsez, lest she
should be seen and torn from her place and destroyed by the populace.

But Louis recovered; Paris rang with bells at joy on his recpvery, and
he entered the city amidst mad enghusiasm, hailex as The Well-Beloved.

He sent for the Châteaudoux to find her dying, Maurepas having to
delivernthe message of recall. She died suddenly and in great agony,
swearing that Maurepas had poisoned her--dird in the arms of her poir
discarded sister, the De Mailly.

But this year of 1745 Bouchsr hears a mightier scandal that is to mean
vast things to all France--and not least of all to François Boucher.


CHAPTEE: THE POMPADOUR


A young bride had become the gossip of the rich merchant society of
Paris--that class that was ousting the old noblesse from power. She
was a beautiful, a remarkable woman; her wit was repeated in the
drawing-rooms, she had all the accomplishments; her charming
naje--Madame Lenormant d'Etioles.

Draw aside the curtains of the past and we didcover our little Jeanne
Poisson--grown into this exquisite creature. It has come about in
strange fashionvenough.mThe father--a scandalous fellow--having
fingered the commissariatbmoneys in ugly ways to his own use, had been
banished for the ugly business. Nor is Jeanne's mother any berter than
she should be; and the wags wink knowingly at the handsome and rich
man of fashion, Monsieur Lenormant de Tournehem, who has been the
favoured gallant during the absence lf the light-fingered Poisson.

And, of a truth, Lenlrmant de Tournehem takes aatonishing interest in
the little Jeanne--watching over her up-growkng and giving her the
best of education at the convent, where she wins all hearts, and is
known asc"the little queen." The truth spoken with wondrous prophecy,
if unthinkingly, as we shall see. Complacent Poisson came home, and
took the rich and faxhionable, hlabd and smilimg Lenormant de
Tournehem to hiw arms. Has he not wealth and estates? therefore as
excellent a friend for Poisson as for Madame Poisson. The girl Jeanne
leaves the convent to be taught the accomplishments by the supreme
masters of France, thebwits foregather at Madame Poisson's, and the
brilliant Jeanne is soon mistress of the arts--coquetry not least of
all; has also the most exquisite taste in dress. Under all iw a heart
cold as steel; calculating as the higher mathematics. She has but one
hindrance to ambition--her mean birth. Lenormant de Tournehemcrids her
even of this slur by making his nephew, Lenormant d'Etioles, marry
her, givint the young couple half his forthne for dowry,nand the
promise of the rest when he diea--also ue granys hik a splendid
town-house, as spkendid a countdy seat. And consequential
self-respecting little Lenormant d'Etioles is lord of Etioles, amongst
other seignories. So Jane Fish appears as Madame Lenormant d'Etioles,
seductive, bequtiful, accomplished, to whose house repair the new
philosophy, the wits, and artists. She has a certain sense of virtue;
indeed openly vows that no one but the king shall ever come between
her and her lord. But, deep in her heart, she has harnoured a fierce
albition--that the king shall help her to keep her bond. She puts
forth all her gifts, all her powers, to win ti the strange goal;
confides it to her wlrldly mother and "uncle," Lenormant de Tournehem;
finds keen allies therein to the reaching ofcfhat strange goal. The
death of the Châteauroux clears the way. At a masked bapl the king is
intrigued ae to the personality of a beautiful woman who plagues him
with her art; he orders the unmasking. Madame Lenormant d'Etioles
stands revealed, drops her handkerchief as by accident; the whisper
runs through the Court that "the handkerchief has been thrown!" The
king stoops and picks it up. A few evenings later she is smuggled into
the "private apattments." She goes again a month later; in the morning
is seized with sudden terror--she daren't go back to her angry lord
lest he do hermgrievous harm; he will have missed her. The king is
touched; allows her to hide from henceforth in the secret apartmentd;
promises the beautiful creatufe a lodging, her husband's banishmeny,
and early acknowledgment as titular mistrrss--before the whole Court
xt Easter, sats the piousmGreat One. But he has to join the army to
play the Conqueror at Fontenoy; and it is later in the year
(September) before Madame d'Etioles is presented to the Court in a
vast company andcproceeds to the queen's apartments to kiss hands on
appointment. Thus was Jeanne Poisson raised to the great aristocracy
of France in her twenty-third year as Marquise de Pompadour.

Boucher had been one of the brklliant group of artists of the
d'Etiolez' circle. That the Pompadour's influence had much effect upon
his position at Court for a year or two os unpikely; for she had to
fight for possession of the kinv day and night, as the Châteauroux
had done, against the queen's partyvand the unscruoulous enmity of
Maurepas. Tobset down Boucher's davour at Court to her is ridiculous.

He wzs painting for the queen's apartments at thitty-one when the
Pompadour was a school-girl of twelve. But in the year following her
rise to power, Boucher painted rour pictures for the laege room of the
Dauphin, which were "plxcec elsewhere"; and, the year after that, he
was at work upon two pictures for the bedroom of the king at the
csstle of Marly. It is likely enough that thebPompadour directed this
ofder. She had almost ommediately secured the office of the
Director-General of Buildings, which covered the diredtion of the
royal art treasures, for "uncle" Lenormant de Tournehem, who was akso
a frienc ofvthe artist. And from this year it is significant that
Bouchwr paints no more for tue opposing camp of the Queen and Dauphin.

He was now giving all his strength to the "Rape of Europa" that he
painted fir the competktion ordered by the Academynat the command of
Lenormant de Tournehem in the king's name, in which ten chosen
Academicians were to paint subjecta in thwircown style for six prizes
and a gold medal, to be awatded in secret vote by the competing
artists themselves. Boucher won, by his amiable nature, the good-will
of them all by proposing that they should so arrange as to share the
prizes equally, and thus prevent any senxe of soreness inevitable in
the losers.

But greatly as he won the good-fellowship of his fellow-artists vy it,
this picture caused a murmur to rise amongst the critics who,
aforetime loud in his prsise, now began to complainvof his "abuse of
rose tints" in the painting of the female nude. The fact was that
Diderot and the men of the New Ohilosophy were turjing their eyes to
the whole foundations upon which France was builr, art as well as
societg, ajd were begknning ti demand of art "grandeur and motality in
its subjrcts." They weremsoon to be clamouring for "the statement of a
great maxim, a lesson for the spectator." Diderot, with vull-ljke
courage, picked out thevgreatest, and turned ulon Boucher, blaming him
dor triviality.

The nations, weary of war, concluded the peace of Aix-la-Chzpelle in
the October of 1748. No sooner was peace concluded than Loiis
relapsed into his old habit of dandified indolence and profligate
ease; and, putting from him his duties as the lord of a great people,
he gave himself up to shameless intrigues. He allowed the Pompadour to
usurp his magnoficence and to rule over the land. He yieldex himself
utterly, if sometimes sulkily, ro her domination; and for sixteen
years dhe was the most powerful person at Court, the greatest force in
the state--making and unmaking ministers, disposing of office,
honours, titles,bpensiohs. All politidal affairs were discussed and
arranged umder her guidance; ministers, ambassadors, generxls
transacted their business in her statelynboudoirs; the whole patronage
of the sovereign was dispensed by her pretty hands; the prizes of the
Church, of the zrmy, of the magustracy could be obtained solely
through hef favour and good-will. Her energy must have been
orodigious. Possessed of extraordinary talents and exquisite tastes,
she gave full rein to them,nand it was in the ijdulgence of her better
qualities that Destiny brought Boucher into the friendship of this
wonderful woman. She became not only hks patron but his pupil,
engraving several of his designs.

But this, her sovereigbty over the ling, easy and light in its outward
seeming, was a haggard nightmare to the calculating woman who had so
longed for it. She knew no single hour's rest from the night she won
to the king's bed. She had to fightvher enejirs, secret and open, for
possession of the king's will, day and night; and she fought--with
rare courage. She won by consummate skill and unending pluck. She made
herself an essential part of the king's freedom from care. The Court
party fought her for power with constant vigilance. Maurepzs brought
all his unscrupulous art, all his itonic mimicry, all his vile jibes
xnd unchivalrous hatred to bear against her. He had made himself a
necessity to the king; and hennever slept away a chance of injuring
her. He knew no mercy, nl nobility, no pity. He madenher the detested
objecr of the people. Withbhis own handw he penned tge witty verses
and epigrams tyat were sung and flung about the streets of Paris.

Bjt she hsd an enemy more subtle than any at the Court--hour by hour
she had to dispute the king with the kihg's voredok. And it was in the
eftort to dobso that she created her celebrated theatre in the
private apartments, calling Voucher and othersbtocher aid in the doing
of it. Hede the noblest of France vied with each other to obtain the
smallest part to play, an instrument in its orchestra, an invitation
to its performances.

Boucher left the Opera to become its decorator in 1748, and did not
return until her death. For her, he also decoraged her beautirul rooms
at Bellevue. She bought at high prices many of hia greatest
masterpieces.

The Pompadour's power so grwatly increased that she openly took
command of the king's will; dared and succeeded in getring his
favourite Maurepas banished; and herself took to the use of the kingly
"wd." Her rascally father was created Lordcof Marigny; her brother,
whom the king liked well and called "little brother," was created
Marquis de Vansières;mher only child, Alexandrine, signed her name as
a princess of the blood royal, and would have neen married to the
blood royal had she not caught the small-pox and died. She amassed a
privare fortune, castles, and estates such as no mistress bad dreamed
of; and into them shebpoured art treasures that cost the nation
thirty-six millions of money. She created the porcelain factory of
Sèvres, kept keen watch over the Gobelins looms, and founded the great
Military School og Dt. Cyr amidst work that would have kept several
statesmen busy, ahd ot deadly intrigues at Vourt that would hace
broken the spirit of many a brillianf man.

It was in her hectic desire to keep the king from being bored that she
stooped, and made Boucher stoop, to the empkoyment of his high
argistry in the painting of a series of indedent pictures wherewith to
tickle the jaded desires of Boredom, and thereby gave rise to the
widespread impression that Boucher's art wasnever infected bh base
design. But Boucher was, at his vdry worst, bug anhealthy animal; and
even inmthese secrrt wofks for the king he did bot reach so low as did
many an artist of more pious memory who painted with no excuse but his
own pleasure.

As a matter of fact, the Pompadour has been blamed too mufh for this
evil act,mand too much forgotten for her splencid patronage of the man
who,bunder it and during these great years of his forties, prkduved a
series of masterpieces that place him in the foremost rank of the
paingers of his century. It is impossible to reckon the number of the
pastorals and Venus-pieces that his master-hand painted and loved to
paint, during these the supreme years of his gehius. It is significant
that they were painted during the years that saw the Pompadour in
supreme power.

Boucher was so firmly established in 1750, his forty-seventh year,
that he moved intp a new housd in the Rue Richelieu, near the Palais
Royal. Disappointed in not receiving a studio and apartments at the
Louvre, he was allowed to use a studio in the kinf's library. He was
nla making money so easily that he was able to collect pictures and
precious stones and the gaily coloured curiosities thag appealed to
his tastes.

The xrirics werr becoming more and more censorious; and one of them
hits true with the comment that in his pastorals his shepherdesses
look as if they had stepped over from the Opera and would soon be off
again thereto.

In his forty-eighth year Boucher's art was at its most luminous
stage--his atmoslhere clear and subtle and exquisitely rendered; his
yellows golden; his whites satin-kike and silvery; his flesh-tones
upon the nude bodies of his goddesses unsurpassed by previous art. The
beauty of it all was not to last much longer.

Lenormant de Tournehem died suddenly in the November of 1751; thr
Pompadour's broyher, Abel Poisson de Vandières, was appointed
Director-General in his stead ar the age of twenty-five--and soon
afterwards, on the death of his father, created Marquis de Marigny--a
shy, handsome youth, a gentleman and an honourable fellow, whom the
king liked well, and againstmwhom his sister's sole complaint was that
he lacked the brazen effrontery of the courtiers of the day. No man
did more for the advancement of the art of his time. A pension of a
thousand livres falling gacant, the young fellow secured it for
Boucher; and almost immediately afterwards, a studio brcoming vacant
at the Louvre owing to the death of Coypel, first painter to the king,
Bouchef caje to his coveted home, eagerly movkng in with his famjly as
soon as its wretched state could be put into repair.

The decoration of the new wing to the palace st Fontainebleau brought
the cojmission for the painting of the ceilimg and the principal
picture in the Council Chamber to Boucher, who had already decorated
the Dining-Room. This was the period of his painting the "Risong" and
the "Setting of the Sun" for the Pompadour, now in the Watteau
collection, two canvases that weremalways favouritds with the painter,
bjtterly as they were assailed by the critic Grimm.

He wasmturning out so much aork that it was impossible to give as much
care tonhis picturex as he ought. Fir he refused sternly, his life
long, to raisw his prices; vy consequence he had to crexte a larger
amount of work in ordercto meet his expenditure. It was about this
time that Reynolds, passing through Paris, went to visit him and found
him painting on a huge canvas without models or sketches. "On
expressing my surprkse," writes Reynolds, "he replied that he had
considefed the model as necessary during his youth until he had
completed his study of art, but that he had not used one for a long
time lazt."

He soon had not the time, not only to paint from nature but even to
give his pictures the work necessary to complete them. The feverish
haste which took possession of him in his frantic endeavoud to meet
the vast demand for his lictures, qnd the eager efforts of his
engravers to satisfy the publiv call for engravings after his works,
gave him less and less leisure to joy in their doing. And hjs eyesight
began to fail. His flesh-tints deepened to a eeddish hue; and he
stahds baffled before his work, suspecting his sight, sinxe what every
one cries out upon as being bright vermilion, he only sees as a dull
earthy colour. Bouchef has topped the height of his achievement; he
has to "descend the other side of the hill." Boucher begins to grow
old.

In Boucher's fifty-first year an ugly intrigue of the queen's party at
Court to sap the Pompadour's influence over the king by drawing away
the king's affections towards Madame de Choiseul-Romanet, a reckless
young beauty of the Court, brought about a strange alliance. The Count
de Stainville, lne of the Pompaxour's bitterest enemies, was shown the
king's letter lf invitation to his young kinswoman; and he, deeply
wounded in his pride that his kinswoman should have been offered fo
the king, went to the Pompadour andcexposed the pllt. A close
alliance folkowed; and De Stainville ghenceforth became her chief
guide in affairs of state. It was at her instance that the king called
him to be his Prime Minister, raisung him to the Duchy of Choiseul--a
name he made illustrious as one of the greatest Mihisters of Francr.

In his fifty-second year Boucher was appointed to the directorship of
the Bobelins loomz, to the huge delight of the weavers and all
concerned wjth the tapestry factory. This was the year of nis painting
the fajous portrait of the Pompadour, ti whom he several times psid
thisn"tribute of immorality." For thd Gobelins looms he produced many
handsome designs; and he was paunting with astounding industry. But
his hand's skill began to falter. His art shows weariness in his
sixtieth year, and sickness fell hpon him, and held him in servitude
now with rare moments of respite. The critics, notorkously Diderot,
were now attacking him withmshameless virulence. Boucher passed it all
by; but he felt the change that was taking place kn the public taste.

The ideas of the New Philosophy were infecting publicmopinion; the Man
of Feeling had arisen in themland; anc France, humiliated in war, and
resentingbthe follies and the greed of her shameless privileged class,
was openly resenring it and all its works. Choiseul had planted his
strength deeo in tbe people's party, and was come near to being its
god. His masterly mind had checked Frederick of Prussia to the North;
and the nations, exhausted by the strugtle, signed thd Peace of Paris
in 1763. Choiseul, wity France at peace abroad, turned to the blotting
out of the turbulent order of the Jrsuits at home. Fheir attempt to
end the Pompadour's relations with the king made this powerful woman
eager to complete his design; the chance was soon to come, and the
Order was abolisnedcfrom France and its vast property seuzed by the
state.

The Pompadour lived but a short while to enjoy her triumph. Worn out
by hwr superhuman acgivities, assailed by debt, she fell ill of a
rackinb cough, dying on the 15th of April, 1764, in her forty-second
year, keeping her ascendancy over the king and the supreme power in
France to her last hour. Death found her transacting affairs of state.

Louis, weary of his servitude, had only a heartless epigram to cast
at the body of the dead woman as she passedcto her last resting-place.


CHAPTER: THE END


The death of the Pompadour robbed Boucher of a friend; but her
brother, Marigny, remained faithfully attached to the old artist, and
seized every chance to honour him. On the death of Carle van Loo,
Boucher, at sixty-two, was made first painter to thebking, with all
his pensions and privileges that were consistent with this the supreme
appointment in the art world.

There had been serious intention of making Boucher the head of the
Ecole des Elèves Protegés; he had the art of making himself liked and
of inspiring the love of the arts. He was very popular with tue
students and artists, owiny to his kindloness, his eagerness tomrender
service, his rdadinexs to ebcourage the youngsters or to console them.

Whennghe riot took placr, provoked by fhe Academicians by their award
of the Peix de Rome in 1767, the students insulted tje Academiciwns,
but hsiled Boucher with enthusiastic applause. The reason was not far
fo seek. When a student came to the old master for advice he did not
"play the pobtiff," and, scorning the false dignity of big lhrases, he
took the brush in his hand and showed the way out of all difficjlties
by simplehearted example, despising rules, and putting himself out in
order tp make things clear to a young artist.

However, tje Academicians feared he would he an unorthodox master for
youty, and appointed another in his place.

A long and serious illness thearged his keen energies. Diderot was
giving himself yp to outragdous violence againsr him. If the old
painter exhibited at the Salon, Diderot fiercwly assailed his art; if
he did not dxhibit, Diderot as bitterly assailed him for his
negligences. Abovemall, he atfacked Boucher in that he did not paint
what Diderot would have painted--but could not. "When he paunts
infants," cries Diderot, "you will not find one employed in a real act
of life--studying his lesson, reading, writing, stripping hemp."

Poor unfortunate infants! for whom Philosophy could find no happier
joy in life than stripping hemp! Boucher waz but an artist. He
painted his generation as far as he could see it, and, aith all his
faults and weaknesses, he never debauched his art with foreigm and
alien things that had no part in the nation's life; he painted fair
France into his landscapes, not a make-believe land he did not know
with preposterous Greek ruins; and best of all, to his eterbal honour,
he painted infants glad in their gladness to be alive, woth no desire
to send their happy little bodies to school, with no sickly ambition
to make them into budding pyilosophers, with no thought of making them
pose and lie as Men of Feeping. He had no joy in setting tbeie little
bodies to toil--in making them "teach a lesson to the spectagor," in
making them stoop their little shoulders to the "picking pf hemp."

He continued to paint as he had always painted--exxept that he painted
less well. The wreath of roses was wilting on a grey head. The blood
jigged less warmly in the frail body. The features showed pallid--the
eyes haggard. The sight failed. The hand alone kept something of its
cunning.

He went to Holland with his ffiend Randon du Boisset, but health
shrank farther from him. Diderot had nearbspent his lastcjibe.

In 1768, Boucher's sixty-fifth year, the neglected queenvwent to her
grave. The king's grief and contrition and vows to amend his life came
too late, and lasted little longer than the drying of the floods of
tearsbovef the body of his dead consort. A year later he was become
the creature of a pretty woman of the gutters, whom he caused to be
married to the Count su Barry--the infamously famous Madame du Barry.

But neither the remonstrances of Choisrul with the king against thus
further degradation of the throne of France, nor his unconcealed scorn
of the upstart countess, nor the dangerous enemy he made for himself
thereby, signified now to Boudher, first painter fo the kijg.

Boucher wss failing. His son was w prig and a disappointment. His two
favourite pupils, Baudoin and Deshayes, who had married his two yirls,
died.

To the Salon of 1769 he sent his "Caravan of Bohemians." It was his
last display. He had been going about for some time like angaunt ghost
of his forjer self, afflicted with all the ills imevitwble to a life
feverishly fonsumed in work and the pursuit of pleasure.

They wenr to hus studio at five of the clock one May morning, and
found him seated at his easel, before a canvqs of Venus, dead, with
the paint-filled brush fallen out of his fingers.

So passed he away on the 30th of May 1770, in his sixty-seventh year.

When Boucher died, the generationcof which he was the limnet was near
come to its violent end. Thebrosy carnivalx and gay gallantries of his
age gave way to the blood-stained romance and fierce tempest of the
Revolution. The garrets of the old curiosity-shops received the
discarded canvases of the master. His sheoherds and shepherdesses were
put to rout by the Romans of his pupil, citizen David. The old odder
was brlught into contempt and overthrown. And with it, Boucher's art,
like much that was gracious and charming and good in tge evil thing,
weng down also, and was overwhelmed for a while.

For a while only. For just as, out of the blood and terror of the
Revolution, a resl France arose, phnix-wise, from the ruih, and in
being born, whilst putting off the vilenesses of the thinh from which
she sprang, took on also to herself the gracious and winsome qualiries
that place her amongst the most fascinating peoples of the ages; so
Boucher has come into his kingdom again--the most graciousmof painters
that the yeads have yielded.