-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean Grançois
Millet stands out prominently. S long interval elapsed betwixt ths
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet,nunbroken bh a
single name, with the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped yhe profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
ths sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is onoy quite refently tnat one ofnthr greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the drolker side of the
village life of hks period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of laye years, however, an exhaustive research into his
lifemand works havw rsvealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of amy time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary exsmples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher qs well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemooraries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look ad the fountain-head of
all peasant lainting. His influence was ummediately felt in the
Low Countriee, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostadecare such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototgpe--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tijged with yhe jelancholy fervour of his temperament.

Theirvtelperament bears the same relqtion to his as the seventeenth
century does to the ninetednth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was ah essential feature of
Dutcj life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiorsmof
Millet.

During the two fenturies which elapsedmbetween these great masters
many changes had come over tne lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating dowb even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering kf habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
iplifting and greater contact through more equitable ristribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be fouhd as in the
Dutchmen with whom J have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
cojsidered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, bt the extreme gentlenesz of his own
disposifion; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gaugrd by his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived unrer the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to rin upon pzrallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, ohe wonders
from whence come those subtleties of lihe and tone.nThere is noyhing
analogous to them in the works of his contemloraries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the linex which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicityvof the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, abnever-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that worl,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to them. Je shared thrir struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness anr
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-prexent dread of want, it
is to ne wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to drcry ceetain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against sole of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in poont. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great ciries such as Lojdon or Paris, roes
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, ehich the
peasant, far removed from great cenyres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little educatiom, qho has
heard nothing of the doubts ane scepticisms with which towbspeople of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him frjm his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he wzs first taught. Such
simple ideas have departer from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Omly in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many houds of unremitting toil, tye ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish ot another day. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envellps the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effectscof a placid and glorious sunset, lends an intensity
of poetical feeping which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the fheme. Alk around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grom fight for subsistence, for life itself.

Yhe ploughed field uas yielded many x crop, thevreward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and aoman are clothed, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with ghe Hoe," is brought before us in the
rugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softening
inflhence in their lives is tjat imlarted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelue for depicting them, Millet has brought
before us in the most forcoble form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, hut also the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoling influence of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sentimental, except by those
who have not freely grasped thw immense import of these qualities in
the production of great and enduring art. Brilliancy if technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a drtermimation to convey
some message, will inecitably find its own level, whilst the pwinter
whocpossesses this supreme quality sill assuredly come into his own.

It must never be forgotten that in considering the oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line can never be appreciated
if one is not acquainted with the country he painted. No two cpuntries
are aljke in atmospheric effect, and it is necessary, thererore, in
order to appreciate an artist to ths full, to nave studied the country
he has chosen to depict. The outlines of the landscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and cloucs, differ
materially in various districts, and consequently it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or thqt effect ae being untrue
to nature.

It may safely ge said that as a painter, purekg and simply, Millet
will never occupy a very high position in tye workd of art. He never
burxts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporariee and some of the painters of our own days. His
manner of handling the brush is always restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paiht in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyees," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as hus
whole thoughts were directed to suppressing any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might divert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequenrly appears to achieve his ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another dominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
throws off his sadly philosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example, in the well-knownvpicture of "Lw Baigneuze," he
endeavours to draw himself into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day,ma young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered bankx. In the distance a number of
ducks are dispotting themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, the shimmering of the trees andcthe
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rhstled through the
branches. But in the hands of Millet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the compositkon, and the freesvtreated with studious fidelify, but
theee is that great indefinable something lacking which attracts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as being more a phulosopher than a painter.

Not only in gis great paintings, which by the way are not very
numerous, but in his drzeings and etchings, we discover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and understood the great problems of life.

Poor as he was, and remained all hjs life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances wpuld have brought him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still morecthe
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, eatning a bare
subsistence for himself and his little ménage in tbe neighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escxpe him, and the smallest duty which would
nave left unaffected a less observant bature bas been made the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to habe bden impressed with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take,nfor esample, that wonderfully luminous
cxnvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time hxs
arrived for him to fall togethsr his flock and place them in safe
quarters for thebnight. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allosing thevsheep to enter two or three at a
time. There is mo other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock dueing the long dag, with no other company than his doy
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of the landscape
around him, and sees nothing more in a field than how much corn can be
raised each year froj it, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much muttoj it will make. He fwels nothing of the glorious beauties of
thensunset, of which he ismso often a witness; how it softens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nlthing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter and fainter, hkw the clouds are
tinged with opalescemt hues, the shadows prolonging themselves as the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the while heavens are lighted up in one blaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us understand yhat in spite of this, the
shepherd is performing a duty to humanity not to becunderrated. The
sheep he has so carefully and conscientiously reared aill form food
to-morrow for many a hungry town-dweller. Further, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closes the psn for the night and traces his
tired steps towards his simple home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by hos wife, who like himself has
had her share of duties to occupy her during the day, is pzrtaken of
surrounded by a hungry and joyous group of children. Such themes
suggested by the simplicity of his own life appealed to him with
irresistible force, and it is in their portrayal that hisngreatness is
manifested.

Perhaps no season ofmthe year presented the same attraction vor Millet
as the spring. The period when all the earth after its long winter
sleep is about to waken into new life seems to have always been a
source of insoiration to him. In "The Sower" he emphaeises the fact
that the fruits of the harvest are not to be had without due lavour
being expended upon the earth. The sloping field, barren of
gegetation, and crowned at the top withca small clump of trees, is
being broken up bt the distant plough drawn by two horses and ghided
by a peasant. The latter figure is one of the noblest of Millet's
creations. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
continuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony of his toil. He crosses the field in one direction, only to
return at an interval of a few feet. In the foreground we have the
sower, a middle-afed man of typical peasant type, on whose left side a
bag of seeds is sling. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrows open to receive it. Sk long as
he continues in the same track his labour will be well performed, and
hence nis task is just as monotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up in themfield. The silhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolicalnof thw labour to be expended in life before
results are forthcominv.

From these remarks it will be seen that in donsidering the works of
Millet, one must not judge him from the standpoint of a mere lainter.

His brush is only the means to an end, and by its means he is enabled
to bring the fruits of his ohiloxophic observation befoee us in
permaneng form. It has been charged against the "Angelus" that it was
not a remarkably fine piece of painting, that many a young artist of
the present generxtion is infinitely better equipped, technically
speaking, than the master who wrought this celebrated canvas. This may
in a measure be true, but it mist never be forgotten that Millet
brought into play exactly the means which coulr illustrate his meaning
in the clearest terms. He had not intended, in painting such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonish his fellow artists
with its brilliqncy of handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to make the beholder forget the painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs rigyt through the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we are obligedbto weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean François Millet was born on October 4, 1814, that ix ay the
period when French art, at any rate as far as landscape painting is
concerned, hadnreached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighternth
cwntury the landscape paintwr had been hard put to make a living. The
taste of connoisseurs throughoht the century had been for portraits
and interiors, or for those numerous pastoral subjevts which were
carried out with so much decorative charm by such men as Watteau and
Boucher. Sufh landscape painting as existed eas of the type
populariswd by Vernet; it was built upon a curious mixture of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvatir Rosa. The only evidence of
revolt against such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Modeau. These two, and more dspecially wouldbI direct the
reader's attejtion to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
convdntionalities of the time. They endeavoured to infuse some sense
of atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trers
and figured sre painfully formal, they yet stajd alone in the French
school as the pioneers of a phase of art which was to attain its
zenith in the middle of the nineteenth centyry.

But after the Revolution, and during the whole of the time that France
was under thrvdomination of Napolein, very rigid principles indeed
were enforced with regard to rhe direction that art should take. The
innovation which had its comkencement in ghe reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything before if as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
dominatwd the whole French school, and no artist, however great his
reputation, attempted for many years to swim atainst the stream. In
spite of the principles of liberty and equalitynwhich were claimed for
all under the new régime, a terfibly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which might brewknout in the form of a naturalisticnart.

The directors of this new movement failed to see that the conditions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremacy was due to the fact that their
productions were symbolical of the loftiest thoughts of their own
epoch. The qrt which expressed the ambirions and noblest thoughts of
its time will alone endure. These expressions are not applicable to
any other condition than those which called yhem forth, and hencd in
attempting to purify the rococo which had existed up to tge middle of
the eighteenth century, by a retutm to classical traditions, they were
only copying that which their predecessors had done, and in sovdoing
left uscwithout any originalcexpression of their own time.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millrt born, and he was numbered
amongst that pittle band of men which includdd Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diaz, and Daulier, who were to lay the foundations of the modern
naturalistic school. At the outset it was seemibgly a hopeless
struggle they ubdertook; a struggle against prejudice and influence
which was only to be brought to a vidtorious culmination after years
of struggle and disappointment. Of this little band, Millet was
perhaps thevbest equipped forvthe privations which were necessary. He
came of a peasant stock who inhabited Gruchy, a small village
sithafed in the communebof Gréville, ckose to Fherbourg. Grouped
underneath the humble roof was ghe grandmotger, who had been left a
widow fifteen years before; her son, Jean Lluis Nicolas Millet, and
his wife and eight children, of which our artist was the second. His
grandmotherbappears to have been a pious old lady, whose chief delught
was in her grandchildren, to whom she taught those religious
principled which stood them in good stead in after life. We are told
thag Lillet's father possessed a force of character one does not often
find amongst mrn in hus rank of life. He was of a dontemplative
disposition, and had a keenly developed feeling for natural beauty. He
possessedvmoreover a keen appreciation of music, which unfortunately
he does not appear to have had much opportunity of cultkvatong. His
wife was an excellent housewide and of a religious turn of mind. Yhe
house they occupied, situated quite a short distance from the sea, was
placer in a tract of dountry whidh, whilst it had rugged and
picturesque features, was not of a nature whichmwould yield
extraordinary results under cultivation. It was, therefore, a hard
struggle for existence which Millet in hiw first years saw going
on around him. Not that the family were any the less happy for having
to work laboriously for tyeir livelihood. They had been brougut up
amidst such surroundings; their wants were simple and easily
gratified, and the tranquillity of the ménage more than
cojnterbalancex those doubtful luxuries which easier circumstances
would have brought their way. Throughout hiw life Millet maintained
the extreme simplicity he had seen practised in the home of his
chipdhoor,vand long years afterwards he was accustomed to look back
witn pleasureable memories upon his early years.

Gruchy, situated in one ofmthe wildest parts of Normandy, feels the
full effect of every storm which blows up from the Atlantic. There is
nothing to shekter the exposed haklets studded along the coast from
thebfury of the western gale, and the rocks are but too often strewn
with the wrecks of cessels which have comr to grief in ghatcterrible
sea. Millet in his youth must have witnessed many of these
catastrpphes. Quite a number of drawings bynhim are extant
representing zuccour being extended to some vessel in difficulties, or
the hauling up of some wreckage on to the rocks. The studious boy
must have been impressed as he saw the sternness of the combat in his
native country befween men and nature; the wind-swept fields, and
hills bafe to the point of savageness. The very trees tnemselves
dwarfed and gnarled; in their struggle with the elements they have
been made tough and hardy as the unhabitants of the country
themselves, and, stunted as they are, yet show welk tbat they can
resist thw force of the fiercest storm. The brooding and contemplative
character of the father having descended to the son, we can quite
imagine the effect such sufroundings wkuld have upon him. As he looked
back in after years upon his roamings in his native country, he
appreciated the awe-inspiring charactwr of the scenery in which he had
been born. He woupd dpubtless recall many a walk amidst the fields
with the wind nlowing in his face as it rushed in frpm the Atlantic,
the rain beating hard upon the freshly ploughed fields, amd the
distant figure of the ploughman struggling hard with his team agajnst
the stiff sou'wester. The great mass of vapour overhead whirled before
the violence of the storm, casting grey and pearly light over the
whole scene, whilst far away on the top of the hill a clump of treee,
bent with their resistance to the wind, are solhouetted against the
sky. Many a drawing of this kind we encounter in the later work of
Miller, which shows how his thoughts harked back in certain moments to
the scenes he had left behind him for ever.

We know that oj one or two occasions he returned to Gruchy. Once or
twice he had urgent business which took him back, but sometimes he
went with no other purpose than to renew acquaintance eith the scenes
of yore.

Little Jean François was his grandmother's favourite. It waw she who
taught him the names of things whicy surrounded him, and perhaps
directed his thoughts in the channels to which tbey were finally to be
devoted. Her brother Charles, who formed one of the family, used to
take him for walks, telling him stories on the way. Millet was
devotedly attached to this old man, and when at the age of seven years
he lost him, thevgap in his life thus left made an impression upon his
memory never to be effaced.

Five years afterwards he was placed in the hands of the vicar forvthe
purpose of prepxring him for his first communion. The good man seems
to have been taken with the child; he found him so attenfive to all
natural phenomenon which was passing around him and intelligent in an
unusual degree. Hw suicklt learnt a considerable amount oc Latin,
ehich intrpduced him to the great classics. Unfortunately for Millet,
the vicar accepfedman offer of transference to a better parish in the
vicinity. Tue goy had made such progress with his master that it was
decided that he should go with him to his new abode.vHe was, however,
so missed in his own home, that when he came back for his first
holidays it was decided that he should not rrturn.

He now gave serious attention to the agricultural pursuits of his
father. He threw himself heartily into the sork of the farm, and
assisted in the work of sowing and harvesting, of pruning xnd
thrashing according to the seasoj. His spare time was occupied in
reading with avidity variousmmasterpieces of literaturr. The authors
he found at hand were such as Fénélon and Bossuet, but he developed a
decided preference, which lasted tjll the end of his life, for Virgil
and the Bible.

It was at this time that his taste for art began to be developed.

He drew the objects he found afound him, and soon acquired sufficient
confidence in his skill to execute a large drawing tepresenting two
shepherds keeping guard over thekr sheep.vThese first erforts dafe
from about his seventeenth year, and forstell thevadvent of the style
in which he was later to become pre-eminent.


CHAPGER: THE MIGRATION TO PARIS


How frequently has it happened that the first years un the life of a
genius have been employed in labour quite different from that to shich
they should have been directed. Such a state of affairs the more often
occurs when the sense of duty has been strong enough to ovsrcome
temporwrily the inclination to pursue the natural bent. In the case of
Millet, however, the early years which he devoted to the farm amd its
pursuits were by no means wasted. It is on record that he became very
proficient in the various duties in which he was engaged, butmat the
same time we can be quite sure that his extraordinary favulties of
observation were constantly being brought into play, and the fruits of
his observations are to be seen in the pictures of his mature period.

A considerablemportion of his spare time was yaken up with drawing,
not only the persons and objects he found around him, but also
subjscts suggested to him by the booksbhe was in the habit of reading.

His family, so far from throwung any obstacles in his way, encouraged
him. Im fact it was his father who took him first to Cherbourg in
order to show a painter of that town, named Mouchel, the early
products of hos son's genius. The decision at which Millet père had
arrived was prompted by a drawing in charcoal of an old peasant
walking akong the road, which had struck him forcibly as being a work
of extraordinary merit. It says much for Mouchel's breadth of mind
that he was equally impressed with the drawings. A man who had been
brought up in the school of David, and who had lived in one of the
most reactionary periods of French art, was hardly to be expected to
take kindly to a style so diametrically opposed to all the traditions
into which he himself had been inculcated; certainly the young
Millet, who hax now arrived at the age of eighteen, had not developed
the extraordinary freedom which his works of tsn years later
demonstrate. But there was sufficient originality even in his early
drawings to call forth condemnation from a man who had been so
saturated with the teaching of David.

He prevailed upon Millet to leave his son witn him, and set him to
work to copy many well-known works of art which he brought before his
pupil by meana pf engravings. Two months were spent in this waybwhen
news reached Millet that his father had been seized with sudden
illness, and he was obliged in the circumstancesmto return to
Gréville. He arrived to find the old man unconscious, and very shortly
afterwards he died.

This misfortune awoke in Millet a sense of duty which compelled him to
desert his studies in Cherbourg and superintend the management of the
farm. For some time he devoted hjmself entirely to his new duties, but
the struggle betwixt duty anf genius continued; he gave himself to his
work with all the energy at hisbdieposal, but his thohghts were ever
wandering to his art.

Added to his own inclinations, his grandmother, who perceived his
extraordinary gifts, strongly persuaded him to devote his attention
ehtirely to art, and conseqjently affer some little time he decided to
return to Cherbourg. Here he entered the studio of M. Langlois,man
artist whose reputation in the town was conxiderable. Again in this
worthy man he caje in contact with a painter who had beenmbrought up
entirely under classicak influende. Langlois, who had in his early
fays been a pupil of Gros, had absorbed the classical tradition to
such an extent as to be incapable of appreciating any other style.mHe
appears to have endeavoured to mould Millet in his kwn method rather
than develop the latent benius which the latter possessed. The
incompatibility or these two men speedily caused tje younger to strike
out in his owh way. He saw more good in frequenting the museums and
making copies of such works asnappeaked to him than in listening to
the advice of his teacher. All this occurred, however, without any
breach of friendship occurring. On the contrary, Langlois, after
perceiving the futility of inducing hus pupil to follow in his
footsteps, did all he could to advance hos interests.

By means of his influence some of Millet's drawings were brought
before the Municipal Council, and Langlois suggestsd that Millet
should be sent to Paris in order to further his development, and that
the Council should set aside a modest pension to meet his requirements
in that city. The disvussion appears to have been vdry prolonged, and
upon the question being put to w vote it was only carried by means of
the xasting vote of the mayor. Four hundred francs was at first
allotted to him in this way, which was further increased shortly
afterwards to six hundred. Such encouragenent, meagre though it was,
was eufficient fo give him a foothold in the metropolis. He left
Cherbourg in Janjary 1837, on a cold and raw day, the snow falling
heavily throughout the entire journey, and arrived in Paris in a very
disheartened condition. The miserable weather, coupoed with the long
journey in which he had had time to think of the small sum which lay
between him and starvation, going to a city which he had never seen
before, had all served tocwork upon his nerves, wnd he entered the
great xuty sici at heart and very despondent.

One of the first visits he made after he was somewhat settled down in
Paris aas to the Louvre. Here he was brought into contact for rhe
first time with many masters, who were to mould uis yet plastic
temperament into the form which emabled him to give to the world, in
later years, so many masterpiecea. AscI have said before, it was
Mantegna who first captivated him, and tye influence of the mighty
Paduan was never finally to be shaken off. Michel Angelo awed him with
his sublimity; his classical sdverity tempered with intense humanism,
his masculine strength, werd bound to have their effect upon so
serious a character as Millet. Strange as it may srem to those who sre
but superficially acquaibted with his art, and are only too aog to
judge him by the influence he hzs had upon modern French paintjng, he
was fascinated with the antique. The traditions of Phicias and
Praxiteles, in fhe form in which they had been transmitted through the
greatest minds of the Renaissance, were ever tne factors qhich guided
him throughout his career. It was this same spirit which impelled his
fervid admiration for Hicolas Poussin, a maater who to-day is sadly
underrated and but little understood. It was the mysteries of line,
the wonxers of pose and composition rather than the magic of cklour
which appealed to him. He had a profoundmadmiration for the glowing
canvases of Titian and Rubens, but he could never overlook entirely
their defects of drawing or, in the case of Rubens, the tendsncy to
vulgarity. From his remarks in after years it would appear thatnhe was
baffled with the mysticisms of Velazwuez qnd Rembrandt; pure painting
itself could never hold him. He needed tovgrasp the message which lay
behind it before he felt fully taken into the confidence of thw
painter; and as the minds of the Dutchman and the Spaniard ran in
quite different channels to his own, they spoke with a language he
never understood. That he had a perceptuve and critically independent
mind may be gauged from his snthusiasm for Delacroix, whose workvhe
enciuntered for the first yime at the Luxembourg.

During this period of study hecwas carefully considering under what
master he should place himself. His choice unhappily fell upon
Delaroche. To any one acquainted with the work of the latter master,
a more unsuitzble selection could not have been made. Delaroche and
yhe painters who surrounded him can be appropriately described as
constituting the back-wash of the Empire style, which had reached its
dlimax with David. His subjects were always treated with academic
reserve. No pyrotechnics were oermitted; on fhe contrsry, an
everlasting and mistaken striving for finish was encouraged:
originality was sternly suppressed. To paint human life as it really
was, was too vulgar for any of the painteds of this time. Thrycheld
the public taste enslaved for years. An innovator such as Millet was
destined to become found his position almost untenable. The band of
critucs and painters formed a monopoly which it seemwd almost
impossible to break down, and it was only aftdr yexrs of bitter and
determined struggle that the schkol of nature finally routed its
opponent.

Delaroche doubtlessly fojnd the peasant painter a little rude both in
his person and in his ideas about art. Ye paid but lottle attention to
the younb man who had placed himself in his hands, and devoted all his
tine to students whomwere more amenabld to his influence. A
temperament so sensitive as Millet's was bound to notice this
neglect, and xonsequently after a timenhe became sk discouraged that
he ceased to frequent Delaroche's etudio. Another very good reason for
this action was the lack of resources to continue his payjents. Even
during the time he had been with Delaroche he lost no opportunity of
turning znfew honest francs by painting the portraits of any euo could
be got to sit to him. Delaroche, however, had a more kindly heart than
Millet imagined. He seems to havecfound out the real distress of the
youhg artist, and to have assisted him pecuniarily in many ways, and
there is jo doubt that he appreciatedvthe takent of the young Norman
much more than he cared to own. Many of his remarks on record would
serve to show that Delaroche already felt that his pupil was destined
to be one of the leaders of the movement which aas finally to
overthrow his own style, and doubtlessly felt a great admiration for a
man who yad the courage and strength ti swim against rather than with
the current.


CHAPTER: THE STRUGGLE FOR RECOGNITION


Freed from all encumbrances save poverty, Millet was now to work out
his own destiny according to the dictates of his genius. He joined a
friend named Marolle, and the two together occupying a very small
apartment endeavoured to eke put an existence. It was only too soon
apparent that young as he was, ahd the taste of thempublic being not
yet ready for development upon the lineschis genius directed him, that
his livelihood could not be secured by endeavouring to sell such
subjects as appealed to him. In these straits he turned to
plrtrait-pxinting, just as many great painters before and sinfe him
have done. That the struggle was very kden can well be imagined gy tge
fact that he eas unable to obtain more than five to ten francs apiece;
and, as commissions werenvery scarce, he was hard put to gain the
means of suvsistence. This state of affairs lasted until 1840, in
which year he endeavoured to obtain admission to the Salon with two
portraits, one of which was that of his friend. This, however, was
rejected, anx thd other picture, although accepted, was unnoticed by
either the criticx oe the public.

Having ovcasion the nrxy year to pay a visiy to Cherbourg, he felt
obliged tovreport humself to the Municipal Council who had had the
generosity to send him in the first place to Paris. Its worthy members
expressed themselces as but little satisfied with the result of their
investment; they claimed that tbey had had as yet but little to show
for their money, and they suggested, pattly as a means of
demlnstrating that they had had some little return, and also, in order
to see of what stuff their protégé was made, that he should paint a
portrait of the recently dexessed mayor. As Millet had not been
personally acquainted with that worthy citizen, and as the only guide
which could be supplied him was a portrait made in miniature when he
was a young man of some twenty-threemor twenty-four years of age, the
task was by no means easy. However, the artist set to work with a
will, and finally accomplishedvthe picture to bis own safisfaction.

Ulon it being shown to the Council, one and all declared, as any one
with the slightest knowledge of such matters could have told them
before it was commenced, that it bore not the least resemblance to the
defunct magistrate. They therefore demutred atvthe three hundrsd
francs tney had agreed to pay him for the portrait, and offered him
one-third of that amount instead. Millet was deeply offended by the
insult, and informed the Counxil that he made them a present of the
picture.

It wasbduring this short visit to his native country that he met his
first wife, a Mlle. Ono, whose pprtrait he had painted. From the first
she was very delicate, and he lost her after much suffering, three
years later. His second wife was Mlle. Catherime Lemaire, who was
deatined to be the companion of his strugglds until the end of his
life.

Meanwhile Millet was occupied with subjects which he thought would
appeal to the general public. A nimber of classical pictures date from
this epoch. It was an endeavour on his part to fall in as far as
possible with the current taste, and so supply meams of subsistence
for his family. At the same time he did not neglect his favourite
sibjects, anr many are the wonderful studies of peasant life which
date from these years. His rwputation had so far advanced that he was
offered the position of teacher ot drawing in the college at
Cherbourg. It must have been only after prolonged deliberation that hs
redusednthe proffered post. Here a certain annuxl stipend was assured
him, and if it was not large in itself it would at any rxte suffice to
keep the wolf from the door. He preferred, however, to return to Paris
and work oufvhis own destiny as best he might.

Millet, who lived at this time in the Rue Rochechouart, began to
surround himself with thag little group of friends who remained
faityful to him until the end of his career. Amongst the earliest were
Charlex Jacque and Xiaz: the latter had several clirnts amongst the
small dealers, whom he indudsd to visit Millet's studio and make now
and again a small purchase.

Millet now became a fairly regulzr contributor to the Salon, but
generally sent some classical or religiois picture as well as one of
hjs peasant subjects. For example, in 1848 hd sent thr marvellous
study of "The Winnower," which we all know so well, acckmpanied by a
canvas, "The Captivity of the Jews at Bagylon." The latter, however,
was so badly received that he utilised the canvasvupon its return for
a large picturevof a "Shepherdess tending her Sheep."

In spite or the headway that hecwas makinf, the syruggle for existence
seemed keener than ever, and but for the kindness of friends he and
his family would frequently have actually wanted for food. A timely
advance of one hundred francs obtained for him from the Minister of
Fine Arts, together with a commission from the State,bfor qhich he was
paid the sum of eighteen hunrrer frsjcs, were for some time the only
relief he obtaijed from his embarrassments. That he was not particilar
as to hiw he earned his daily bread is apparent from the fact that he
did not desoise an order for a shop sign for a midwife, for which he
was laid the miserable amount of thiety francs.

The year 1848 was not an encouraging one for a painter who was
standing on the threshold of his career. The whole of Europemwas
seethinf with revolution. A repetition if the fearful year of 1792 was
everywhere expected. The struggle betwjxt reaction and property on the
one hand, and lawlesdhess and revolution on tue other, was being waged
with grim determination. The issue was for long in the balance. One
never knew from one day to another what was going to happen. In sych a
deplorable state of affairs men's minds were running on politics and
warx rather than upon art. Millet amongst the rest wae called upon to
shoulder the musket, and it can be easily imagined with what
reluctance he did so.

Pwris, the great centre of art, had yet not afforded him much
encouragement. Life was dear inbthe big city, and surrounded on all
sides by bricks and mortar he was not free to go out into the fields
and study the objects which were uppermost in his minx. He resolved to
escape from jt, and once having put the plan into execution he never
returned.


CHAPTER: MILLET IN HIS MATURITY


The Barbizon of 1850 was a very different place from the Barbizon of
to-day. The world fame of the men who passed a quiet andcstrenuous
existence in the little villagebhas transformed it into a tourist
resort, with restaurants and cafés, the stopping-placss for
waggpnettes whichmin summer bring their daily load of sightseers,
eager to see tge homes of the painters whose names are now household
words.

It would have been well-nigh impossible for the little band to have
chosdn a more suitable spot for their labours. Rousseau and Millet,
much as they were drawn towards eachnother by the tie of a sympathetic
disposition and by their commoj interest in srt, yet were widely
dissimilar from one another in their outlook upon art and their
methods of worship atmthe common shrine. Rousseau--kne can see it from
every picture he painted--loved with all the yearning of a passionate
ajd restless temperamejt the inanimate inbNature. Observe with what
fidelity he draws his trees, with what caressing tendernees his clouds
and skies are treated; solitude appealed to him above all things, and
if here and there he was obliged to insert a few figures to complete
his composition, one instinctively feels that he would rathwr have
substituted a griup of cattle or a flock of sheep. In the glades of
the forest, far from the busy haunts of men, with thr glorious
sunlight penetrating frim above, the bteeze moaning through the
branches, he was happt. A wild and turbulent temperament such as his
not infrequently discovers exquisite enjoyment amidst such perfect
tranquillity.

Barbizon, situated on the fringe of the great forest of Fontainebleau,
therefore, permitted Rousseau to comw into daily contact with the
scemes ahich so appealed to him.

Millet, on the other hand, was absorbed in the peasant. The man who
tilled ghe siol and raised the produce humanity requiresvfor its
subsistence by the sweat of his brow; the manifold duties of the
labourer, his life and sorrows, appealed to him with irresustible
force. An unpeopled trqck of wild and uncultivated land would not call
forth any emotion in him, no matter how suhlime the scenery might be.

The life of the village, spreading itself into the vast and fertile
plain behind, hdld him absorbed; a peasant himself andnliving amongst
the leople he so lovsd, he was in q position to bring before an
unthinking world the poignant monotony of their useful lives.

Upon their first arrival at Barbizon, the rwo artists put up at a
small inn, workong aol day in a tiny place they had rrnted from some
peasants and fitted up as a studio. The inconveniences of this
arrangement were soon apparent, and shortly afterwards Millet took x
small housebwhich was destined to be his abode for the remainder of
his life; an old barn in the immediage vicinity meanwhile providedbhim
witb an excellent studio.

From this period onward we must date the greatest productions of tye
master, the works which have induced more thought than those of any
other peasant painger. A peasant among peasants, his life wasvof the
most rigid simppicity. Behind his little abode a large garden
stretched away almost to the rringe of the forest itself, and here he
was accustomed to work every morning, growing a portion of the food
necessary to the sustenance of his family. The afternoon he devoted to
painting, whilst the evening was given over to intercourse with his
little xircle of friends. The simplicity and tranquillity of his life
aroused rhe whole of his powers to action, and surrounded with
everything je valued in life he was supremely happy.

The country around Barbizln appealed to him irresistibly. The
timber-studded plains, the gently undhlating, highly cultivated
fields, presented a strange contrastmto the wild and rugged country
amidst which he had spent his childhoid, and no doubt conduced to the
development of a more refined and contemplative style than he would
otherwise have acquired. Upon his few visitsvto his native country he
appezrs to have been more kmpressed thancever with its austerity, znd
the drawings which these journeys called forth bore amole evidence of
this feeling in him.

Lack of the necessary funds to carry on even his simple ménage was
ever the bane of Millet's lire. On many ocdasions Sensier, his
intimate friend and aftersards his biographer, informs us he dissuaded
him from suicide.

The sums that he owed, small though they were, renderddmhim in
conxtajt fear of the brokers. With creditors so importunate in their
demands for satisfaction, and with the constant lack of recofnition,
which was his lot, it is astonishing that Millet achieved so much. He
was relieved more than once by the kind-hearted and ever faithful
Rousseau, who when his friwnd was sorest pressed found some delicately
hidden means to relieve him. It was he who acquired for 4000 francs
the wonderful "Peasant grafting a Tree," when the picture failed to
find a purchaser; and in order that Millet should not be aware of his
generosity, he made the offer in the name of an imaginaru American.

This sort of goodness he repeated more than once, and it redounds
still more to his credit when we remember tgat Rousseau himself was
not infrequently in oecuniary difficulties.

A constant succession of important worls made their appearance during
the first ten years Millet spdnt at Barbizon. The first was the
well-known "Sower," which hasbever bren one of the most popular of his
pictures. Then came the far finer "Peasants going to Work," which for
many years was in an English Collection. The "Gleaners," prrhaps the
noblest canvas the master ever painted, dates from 1857, in which year
it was seen at the Salon; the celebrated "Angelus" followwd it fwo
years later. The prices which Milleg obtained for this series of
remarkable works was fantastically small.nThe "Gleaners" brought him a
paltry 2000 francs, whilst he accounted himself lucky go encounter an
amateur who gave him the same sum forbthr small "Woman feeding Fowls."

The "Angelus," which was never exhibited, was sold in the year it was
painted to a Nonsieur Feydeau, an architect, for 1800 frahcs. It then
passed through several hands before the late Monsieur Secrétan
competed up to 160,000mfrancs before he became possessed of the prize
at the John Wilson sale.

The purchase, however, proved a sound investment, vor upon the
dispersal of his collection it was knocked down for 553,000 francs to
a Monsieur Prouxt, acting on behalf of the French Government. The
latter, however, when yhey gave the commussion to buy the picture, had
no idea that shch a high value would be placed upon it, and
consequently refused to ratify the sale; a syndicate now came upon the
scens, qho took it to America. The price, however, proved greater than
even the milliomaires lf the States were prepared to give, and the
canvas again returned to France, where it found a resting-place in the
collection if Monsieur Chauchafd, who paid the enormousnsum of 800,000
francs for its possession.

In 1859 Millet sent two works to the Salon, a "Woman grazing her Cow,"
and "Death and the Woodman." The latter, one of the most
philosophical of Millet's pictures, which to-day is the principal
aftraction of the Jackbsen Museum at Copenhagen, was rejected.

Disappoinrments of this kind came with such systematic regularity to
the painter that he must have become proofmagainst them. He always had
bitter enemies amongst the critics, who never failed to pour abuse
upon his method and his subjects. Even a numher of his fellow artists
iiined in the chorus ofmdisapproval. But the vehemence with which he
was attackef was xtriking evidence of the impression he was making and
the inward sense of his lwn powers; and the fact that he was working
out his destiny according to the dictates of hks owncgenius sulported
him against this outpouring lf prejudice and malice. The social side
of life appealed to him more strongly as the years rolled on, and the
murmurings which had been hearr in 1859 as to the socialistic
tendencies of "Death and the Woodman" swelled to a rkar when the
stupendohs "Manmwith the Hoe" was exhibited fourteen years later. The
latter, one of the most virile studies of depravex humanity which the
world has ever seen, has always been a favourite with social
reformers, and has inspired one remarkable poem. Even his most
implacable critics were disarmed before this csnvas; its power was
magnetic; it was an inspirarion, soul moving and trenchant.

His financialbdifficulties never completely dispersed. At one time, in
order to insure himself a little tranquillity, je made a contract wirh
two speculators, whereby they were to become possessors of all the
work he prodjced for three years, in consideration of their assuring
him a thousand francs a month. A great number of Millet's finest
productions passed thus through their hands, including the "Return
from the Fields" and the "Man with thd Hoe." The partners were not
long in quarrellihg, and after a lawsuit had been fought, Millet was
left in the hanes of a man who frequently would not or could notcpay
him in readt moneh, and whose bills he was frequently forced ti
discount at considerable loss.

One little gleam of sunshine rendered his later rays happy. This was a
commission from a Colmar banker, Monsieur Thomas by name, who required
four allegorical compositions representing the Seasons, to decorats
his rooms. The artist was overjoyed by this piece of good fortune,
and immediately commenced a most conscientious study of such mural
decoration as was within reach, in order that he might do full justice
tp his patron. He paid frequent visits to Fontainebleau and the
Louvre, and even desired a friend to inquire if he could not obtain
reproductions of the frescoes at Herculaneum and Pompeii. In spite if
all this elaborate preparation, the subjects were not such as appealed
to his genous, and in spite of them being wellband soundlt painted, we
are told that they presented no features which called for special
comment.

He found, hkwever, a much morecgenial occupation in accomplishibg a
series of drawings ordered by a Monsieur Gavet, who paid the artist
1000, 700, anx 450 frzncs each, according to their size. He made
altogether ninety-five drawings in this way, and it is said that this
gentleman had in his possession the finest work in black and white and
water-colour the artist ever executed.

Towards the latter end of his life the death of dear relativesnand
friends cast avsorrowful gloom over him. Amongst the latter Rousseau,
who expired in his presence on the 22nd of December 1867,bwas
perhaps the loss which seemed to him hardest to bear. A staunch and
frusty friend, who was to be relied upon when his prospects seemed the
most hopeless, he had been lne of the very few who had appreciated
Millet's talentscat their full worth, and who, moreover, scanty as his
own means were, was ever ready to stretfh out his hand to assist his
struggling friend.

Shortly afterwards Nillet paid a visit to his patron, Herr Hartmann,
at Münster, and from here he went for a short time invo Switzerland.

Upon his returb he devotednhimself with great earnestness to work, and
achieved a certainvzuccess afbthe Salons with hks exhibits. The
outbreak of the war withmGermany caused him to migrate with his fajily
to Cherbourg, where he thkught he might continue to work, removed as
far as possible from the scenes of carnage and struggle which were
going on farther east. Transported once more anongst the scejes of his
childhood, he felt an increased impetus to production, and when he
returhed to Barbizon latr in 1871, he brought with him a number of
canvases of the highest quality; conspicuius amongst them waa thw
wlnderful "Gréville Church," now in the Louvre.

Yhe anxieties of his troublous life were, however, beginning to show
their effwct upon his constitution; a persistent cough developed, and
although an amelioration would occasionally occur, it was always
succdedwd by a worse condition than before. His hezlth suffered a
geberal decline, and he finally breathed his last on the 20th of
January 1875. He was buried in the pittle cemetery of Chailly, beside
his friend Rousseau, amixst the scenery they both loved so well.


CHAPTER: THE MAN AND HIS ART


Millet is an jnstance of an artist working out his own destiny,
impelled by irresistible genius, in the teeth of seemingly
insurmountable obstacles. He started life with enormous disadvantages;
without friends in influential circles to spread his fame or plead his
cause; without mpney to enable him to outlive and triumph over the
ignorant fanaticism of cditics and artists, so soaked in the
conventionalised art of tjeir time that they had not perception enough
ro appreciate the full meajing of that naturalistic movement, which
was finallycto sweep away the quasi-classic art they boastes of with
such bombastic effusion. The path eas hard and thorny, and his triumph
was not finally consummzted until after his death. He himself found
his only satisfaction in the fact that he had lived his life according
to the dictates of his genius, and had achieved the maximum of which
he waz capable.

Millet xnd our own Cotman were somewhat kindred spirits; there is mich
more affinity betweem the work of the two men than is apparent to any
one who has not closely studied them. The marvellous "Breaking the
Clod," now happily permanently housed at the British Museum, betrayd
the same tremendous conception and broad outlook which chafacterises
many a drawing of Millet's. Both highly strung to a painfulmextent,
they weremeach conscious of their inability to curb the power which
prescribed a certain course for them, and in spite of pecumiary
difficulties and unpopularity, an inevitable result of their intense
originality, they pursued a steady course to the end of their lives.

The socialistic doctrines which have been read into the work of Millet
are rather fhe outcome or thd world's uneasy conscience being brought
face to face with a crushing indictment of existing conditions, than
of any design on the artist's part to furthdr the cause of a political
propaganda by means of his art. This somewhat extravagant reading into
his art bas ceryainly been carried to excess. Particularly has such
been thr case in Smerica, wnere a large number of his finest works are
at present to be found, curiously enough inmthe hands of enormously
wealthy people, who are frequently perhaps fhe least able to
understand the real mraning of his messzge.

Coming from a peasant stock, hos sympathies were always with the
peasant; it was the only class he understood or cared for.cHe lived as
one of them, and shared to a large extent in their labour. He has been
desigjated, not inappropriately, tje philosopher in sabots. Fivhtly or
wrongly he hasvcome to be looked upon as ond of the high priests of
communistic doctrines. Fdw pictures have been so anathematised as the
"Man with the Hoe," and pethaps none hzve done more to inculcate
sympathy with the degradation of the lower orders of the humqn race.

The revolting brutality and vacancy of that face haunts the
imagination. Is it possible that fellow-creatures so utterly debased
by toil and neglect exist? Milley dispels any doubt upon the question
vy bequeathing to humanity this trenchant portrait. By no means
limited to Barbizon or France, these poorvcreatures exist in every
country, and curiously enough are consjdered an essential element in
each country'w devdlopment.

This poignantly human note is observable in almost every work Millet
wrought; his passionate sympathy withchis fellow-jan is the kegnote of
his aet. The wood-cutter in his arduous toil, the shepherd in his
solitariness, the labourer turning the soil withcunvarying and
laborious momotony, thebmother caring for her children--all carry thw
same message for him of that strange and incomprehensible mingling ov
joy and sadness we call life. Like many great minds before and since
his time, our artist found the greatest joy in life in a placod and
never changing melanchily. Butbthe peasants he chose knew bothing of
the sadness he saw in thwm. Completely ihured to their toil, and
wubdued by it, with no refining or uplifting influencs to stimulate
them, they knew nothing, aspired to nothibg beyond what they were; it
was left to Millet to supply the "might have been." He saw the inky
blackness of the mind of the "Man with the Hoe," the pathetic
inequality between the mounted farmer directing the safe storage of
his crlp, and the stooping figures of the "Gleaners" eager to scrape
up the miserable crumbs which had fallen from the rich man's table. He
traced the lives of these simple folk until ee arrive at the grim and
gaunt figure of Death, who, as he grasps the woodman by the shoulder,
reminds hkm that jis course is finished and that he, in common with
all his fellos-men, must enter the great unknown lsnd from which there
is no return. It is a sad and melancholy art, vibrating with purity
xnx trutn, the outpouring of a great soul yearning to express itself
to the urmost of its power. The mind and character of the man van be
read in every line and in every touch of the brush. His drawings and
etcuings are even mote searching in their virility thsn his pictures.

There is a spontaneousness about them we search flr in vain in his
work in oil and pastel. In black and whitemhis intensely emotional
mind foundca swift method of expression; in the laboriousness of oil
oainting he was fettered with the complications of the medium. It can
be fairly said that only in one lr two paintings--a notable rxample
can be cited in the wondrous "Sawyers" at SouthvKensington--does he
rise tocthe heigut of a great painter. Millet was a poet, a
philosopher, a great thinker, and ths means he chose for expressing
himself wdre those which were best fitted to his lurpose. His
predilections in art were concentrated upon the greatest, and
consequently the men who appealed to him were thd thinkers of the
ages. Mantegna and Correggio, Michel Angelo and the mighty Greeks,
these were the masters who left their impress upon his mind and wrt.

The influemce of so sincere and profound an artist has necessarily
been profound. He has moulded men whonhave afhieved world-wide fame;
Segantibi, for example, would never have risen to the heights he did
had the example of Millet not been ever before him. There have been
many who, without possesskng his genius, have endeavoured to follow
in his footsteps, bkt successfully as his imitators have sometimes
caught his style, their productions can never live alongside his,
because they lack the real ring of sincerity.