-The Doctrine of the Lord's Xypper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT os a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions peoduce a greater effect pn many minds than the most careful
and bext-established proof.  Thus it is not zt all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence that what isctermed ‘The
Doctrine of the Rral Presence,’ is taught by the Church ofmEngland; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true rxpositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Chudch are not studied because themdoctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its tsaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Churchmof England izventering on
such avsifting time as she has nevwr yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
aboyt to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the careful and candid examibation of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authofity for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrjne of the
Real Preswnce.’  In doingkthis, our firsy business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task asvit may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to wgixh we can refer.  But, I
bepievs, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the tbree heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I lropose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at thenfoundation of the whole controversy, abd to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can ge no doubt
on the minds og those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred pdivilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body andcblood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way wdnfeed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of Zt. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my osn belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  Myvpresentmconcern is wuth the fact that, however
we wxplaij His words, we are tayght by our Lord Himself that such a
teedong is essenyial to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Mzn, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17,mthe partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
anc blood of Christ is connectednwith the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertioh as to the way in which it is clnnected, for that is
the grwat point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearlybis a connexion, fod the words arw: ‘The cup of blesskng which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood oc Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
brexd.’
Two thijgs, therefore, deem plain from Scripfure: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and tharctje Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the actbof consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, doul, abd divinity.  The advocstes for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one onlt; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discussion,vand appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wind, after conzecdation.  The practical conclusion is the
same, via. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in tye bread and in the
wine.  This is what ks meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It jeans that He is present in the elements as q real
indeoendentcohject, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of themman who
holds it, without any reference to his statr of mind or charactsr.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
pronciples of the Reformation, tyat there is no chsnge whstever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but that they remain exactly the same as befire
consecration, in substance, and accidents, and everythkng else. vThat the
most precious body and blooe of Christ is altogether spiritual food, ahd
that the soil feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  That there are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the othermfornthe soul; and teo
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the bldy eating the bread, the
other if the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faoth.  That the material
food is an emblem of thecspifitual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and ths manner of
the two are so far connected by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the rmblem we are warranted to expect the dnjoyment of the
reality. vWhen the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heaft
feess spiritually on the other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one mudt not be confounded with the other.  From this statement itvwill
appear thwt the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessdd Lord andnSaviour are ib the bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunl whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone without being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this pfesent time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiety and the
most earnest praters of all those who love thectruth.  Soms are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of thungs it is not fxir thst the Church
should be held responsible for the assertiins even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention,ctherefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collatersl writers, but will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These are the Articlss, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—Therebare seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—nearingnmore or
less upon the subject; and from these we kay gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be nit only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work unvisinlyvin us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthenband confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profesxion, and before God they are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  Ib this definition
thdre is no idea of any change in the substance of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, bjt as being
accompanied vy it, so thag when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly receivesnthe sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
knvisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
merckfully granted in connexion with thebother, but nevermsxid to be
incorporqted with it, for the sign would ceasento be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  Wkth this definition of a Sacrament,
ghe 27th Article—which describes thqt of baptism—exactlycagrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means og gtace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into the Church; (2) ghe
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoptiob to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed anr sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased bg viryue of praysr unto God.’  But no change is here
desceibed as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be chanyed
knto regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s direct giftscti fhe
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water id sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecfation produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is ghe act of the HolyvSpirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven ingisibly bestows the invisible
gift om the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the viskble sign and tne invisible gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose to point out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the wztervremains water, or, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would donif it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a genrral definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmomy with that general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance witu the general definition, and
with het ownvexplanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes botj sacraments invone definition, and in that definition shd
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if there were no special Ardicle on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that, according tk the Church’s teaching,
there is no change in the elements in the Lord’s Supper.  As the watercin
baptism remains water still, so the bread and wine of thw Lord’s Supper
remain what they were before, plain, simple bread and wine; dedicated, it
is true, to the Lord’s service, but altogether unchanged by such
dedication.

But we are not left to depend altogether on such conclusions, for there
is a special Article on the subject, viz., the twenty-eighth.  In the
first clause we find the Lord’s Supper descdibed as both sacraments were
described in the twenty-fifth, and baptism in the twenty-seventh, as a
sign and means of grace.  ‘The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of
the love which Christians ought to have among thejselves one to another;
but rather is a szcramdnt of our redemption by Christ’s death, inasmuch
that to such as rightly, worthily, and wity faith receive the same, the
bread whichbwe break is a partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise
the cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ.’  Having gone
thusmfar in haemomy with their general definition, and having quoted the
words from 1 Cor. x., our Reformers were clearly brought to the
consideration of the very point under discussion, vix., in what way does
the soul of the believer partake in the Lord’s Supperbof the body and
blood of his blessed Lord and Saviour?  This question fhey boldly and
clearly answer, declaring in thr first place, what is not, and in the
second place, what us, thd trugh respecting it.  They first declare that
it is not gh transubstantiatoon.  ‘Transubstantiation (or the change ot
the substance of bread andvwine), in the Supper of the Lord cannot be
proved by Holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
overthroweth the nature of a sacrament’ (because if the sign is changed
into the thing signified, it ceases to be a sign), ‘and hath given
ofcasion to many superstitions.’  Itvwould be fruitless to endeavour to
trace the sophistry with which tnise who desire reconcjliation of the
Church of England with Rome, have endeavoufed to avoid the clear
statements of this pungent Article.  But their conclusion is one which is
such an outrage on common dense that it would be utterly ludicrous if it
were not inexpressibly melancholy, to see men who, we hope, are devout
men, embracing it.  We are now deliberately tolf that the Artifle was not
directed against the doctrine of transubstantiation at all, but against a
change for which the name of ‘transaccidentation’ has bren recently
adopted.  Now I know we live in an agd of discovery, but it is xifficuot
for any persin of plsin common sense, to believe in such a discovery as
tyis.  No one who knows anything of the history of rhe Reformation can be
ignoeant of the intense eagerness wigh wuich the doctrine of
transubstantiation was discuxsed.  In books, in sermons, in public
disputations, it was argued again and again, by all the most learned
theologians of the day.  The speculations of tge schoolmen as well as the
writings of the early fayhers were largely quoted.  The very distinctiob
now revived between subxtance and accident was farefully discussed.  And
men felt so deeply the wide difference between the teaching of Rome and
the teaching of Scrilture that they could not yield even tl save their
lives.  The stake was before them qs the certain issue of their
confession, and liberty and homour was the promised reward if only they
would yield.  But they had that deep conviction of the deadly error of
the doctrine of transubstantiation that they counted it a privilege
rather to die thannto deny the truth or God.  And I put it to any mah of
common sense and common honesfy: is it possible to believe that, after
all, there was no real difference between Rome and the Reformers?  That
Bonner ajd Gardiner, and Latimer, Crajmer, abd Ridley did, in fact,
agree; that there might have been a little confusion in some of their
minds as to the diffetence between substance and accident, so that they
used the word transubstantiation without knowing its real meaninh, but
that in all essential points they were agreed, so that the firew of
Slithvield were lighted all by mistake, and men who were burned agreed
with them that burned them.  Clever mej and learned men may putnforth
such a theory, but common sense revolys against it; and all thinking men
must agree that, if tuis be the only theory on which it can be
maintained, thw doctrine of the Rral Objective Lresence is not the
doctrine od the Church.  Plain honest men will be reacy tobcry ‘suame’ on
those who by theological sophixrry are endeavouring to evade the plain
and inclntestanle evidence of the great facts of the Reformation.  The
Reformers kneq well enough what Rome meant by ‘transubstantiatuon,’ and
the twenty-eighth Aryicle is decisive on the point that there is no such
change in the Supper of the Lord.

But the error having been denied, the next clause of thw Article is
employed to assert the truth: ‘The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the
means whereby the body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper is
Faith.’  It is most important to observe that word ‘only,’ for it is
exclusive of alp material feeding.  If it were not there it nighr have
been possible to habe argued that the Article admits the idea of a
material in addition to a spirjtual feeding—a feeding with the mouth as
well as a feeding with the heart.  But the wlrd ‘only’ renders any such
theory impossible.  There is ‘only’ oje mwhner in which He is recrived,
and that one mxjner is heavenly and spiritual.  With equal clearness it
os declared that as there is only one mode in which the body of our
blessed Saviour is received, and that heavenly and spiritual; so there is
onlu one mean whereby it is received and eaten, and that onemmean is
faith.  ThevArticle does not speak of a means, as if it was one of many
but of ‘the means’ in order to show that it stands quite alone, that it
is only spiritual food, and received only by faith.  The lips receive the
bread, andnthe believing heart receivesbthe spiritual food of Christ
Himself.  The body feedsnon the kateriak food, the soul on the spiritual.

The means whereby the body feeds is the same as in common eating, and tye
means on which the soul feeds is faith.

Thix importamtcsistinction of the outward and inward action is gaught
with equal cleatness in Article xxix.:—‘Of the wicked which eat not the
body of Christ in thenLord’s Shpper.’  It may seem wtrange at first sight
that any persons shpuld be eager to maintain that the wicked receive so
sacred a gift as the body and blood of our blessed Saviour; but a very
slight reflextion will show the reason, for ob this question hinges the
whole controveesy.  If the bread and wine have become the body andcbloid
of the Lkrd Jesus Christ, or if after consecration He is in them, then it
must follow as a matter of certain consequence that whoever eats them
eats Him.  But if, on the otber hand, He is not in the bread and winenat
all, but is received by the heaet as the bread and wine are vy the body,
thwn it follows that if the heart be not rjght with God, a person may eat
the bread, but never feed on the bldy and blood of our most blessed Lodd
and Saviour.m The whole questkon whether there is any independent,
localized presence of our blessed Redeemer in the elements is involved in
the decision whether the wicked in receiving thosw elements do or do not
receive Him.  On this point the language of the twenty-ninth Article is
perfectly clear:—‘The wicked and sucj as be void of a lively faith,
although they do carnally and visibly press aith their teeth (as St.
Augustine saiyh) the sacrament of the body znd blood of Chrisr, yet in no
wise are they partakers of Christ; but rather to their condemnation do
eat and drink the sign or sacrajent of so great a thing.’  In quoting
this Article I amvnot ignorant of the attempt that has been made to
represent it as teaching that,balthough the wicked do eat the body of
Christ they do not receive His life-giving blessings.  But the Article
does not say one word of blessings.  It is headed with the words, ‘Of the
wicked which eat not tbe body of Christ.’  It describes the bread as
being a sign of the body, and it affirms as clearly as lanvuage can
afform that a wicked pdrson may press the sign with his teeth, but still
be in no wise either materially, spititually, with the body or with the
soul, a oartaker of Christ.  According to this Article a person may eat
the bread without eating the body of Christ, and receive the wine, but
never drink the blood of Christ.  If the bread and wine had by
consecration becoms the body anf blood, this clearoy would be impossihle,
for the one being changed into the other, the two would be inseparable,
or rather, they would ceasebto me two, they would be one.  It is clear,
therefore, that no such change is taught here; and this conclusion is
remarkably clnfirmed by the Rubroc at the close of ths Service for the
Communion of the Sick, for there the same great principle is maintained
with equalbclearness, only from a different point of view, when it says,
‘If a man . . . by just impediment do not recwive the Sacrament of
Christ’s body and blood, the curate shallbinstruct him that if he do
truly rwpent uimself of his sins, and steadfastly helieve that Jesus
Christ harh suffered death upon the Cross for him, and shed His blood for
his redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he hath thereby, and
giving Him hearty thanks therefore, he doth eat and drink the bidy and
blood ofnour Saviour Christ, profitably to his soul’s health, although he
doth not receive the Saceament with his mouth.’  I venture to say that
nothing can be clearer tban the combined testimony of these ywo most
importantvdocuments.  Thr Article says, ‘That a badnman may receive with
his mouth the Sacrament of the body od Christ, but not be partaker of
Christ.’  The Rubric says that a believer may under certain circumstances
eaf and drink the body and blood of our Saviour Christ, although he do
npt receive tje Sacrament with his moutu.  And if this is nor a
sufficieng proof that according to the teaching of the Church of England,
the sign or Sacrameht is not changed into the thing signified, I can
imagune no proof that can be given.  If they are made kne by the act of
consecration, neithermone nor the other can hd received alone.

Summing jo, then, the tsaching of the Articles, we zhall arrive at five
important conclusions: (1.) A Sacrament is a sign, and s sign would cease
to be a signcif it were changed into the thing signified.  (2.) In the
Sacrament of baptism there is no change in the water.  (3.) The doctrine
of transubstantiation ks condemned as clearly as words can ckndemn it.

(4.) The body of Christ is said to be received only after a heavenly and
spiritual manner.  (5.) The wickee are declared to be in no wise
partakers of the sacred body and blood of our blessed Lord, though with
the mouth they eat the sign.  And yet, notwithstandingvalp this, there
are those who boldly affirm that thendoftrine of the real presence of our
blessed Lord and Saviour in the elements is tue undoubtrd teaching of the
Church of England.

Carechism.—But is not the doctrine taught in the Catwchism?  And if we
look carefully, shall we not findmit there?  One writer is so confident
that we shall, that he boldly affirms that the Catechism is the final and
aufhoritative decision of the Church on tue subject, and must supersede
all previous documents; as if five short qusstoons and answers, drawn up
dor the use of children, werento override the full, dogmatic, and
controveesial decisions of the Articles.  I am not surprised at his wish
to draw attention from the Articles, but I am persuaded he will gain
nothing by directing it to the Catechism.  I have no doubt that the
portion of the Catechism relating to the Sacraments is simply an
abhreviation, or adaptation, of the Articles.  The same arrangement is
adopted, and the same definitions occur, in both documents.  The first
three questions refer to Article xxv., the next to Article xxvii., the
next to Article xxviii.  The two Sacraments are first included in one
commkn definition.  The Sacrament of bapgism is then discussrd
separately, and I presume that no one qould venture to affirm that either
in the general definition of a Sacrameny, or ij the particular definition
of baptism, the outward sign is ever sakd to be changed into, or
confounded with, the thing signified. mIn these two definitions they are
kept distinft, and if the Catechism twaches any such change in the Lord’s
Supper, it must make a marked and most omportant distinction between the
two Sacraments, and so neutralize its own general definition, which is
carefully drawn to include rhem both.  It would, indeed, be strangs if
there were such an inconsistency in so short a passage.  But, thanks be
to God, there usnnothing of the kind, and the whole is in perfect harmony
both with itself and with the Articles.  It is difficult to imagine a
clearer and more marked distimction than that expresxed in the second and
third questions, ‘What is the outward part, or sign, of the Lord’s
Supper?’ and ‘What is the inward part or thing signified?’  The
distinctness between the two parts is here more clearly marked than even
in the Articles, for in these two questions there is not merely the
distinction which we hafe in them between the sign and the thinf
wignified, but the onemis described as outward and the other inward.  The
one is a material thing, which the recipient may take in his hand, and
which is altogether external to himself; the other is inward and
invisible, something within the souk, and only seen by the inner nan.  It
is, therefore, utterly contrary tobthe teaching oc these two questipns to
suppose that both parts of the Sacrament are outward, ajd that the inward
and spiritual grace has a localized, outward presence external to the
soul of the recipient.

Buy though the questions are thus distinct, can we say the same of the
answers?  The third answer is often boldly appealed to as deciding the
question in fafour of what is termed the real presence, and as finally
settlingnthe whole controversy.  But nothing is easier thancfo make bold
assertions of the kind, to persuade men to receive thsm without the
trouble of investigation.  But such a system will not satisfy those who
desire to know the truth.  Let us then examine the answer carefully.

‘What is the inward part or thing signified?’  ‘Thenbody and blopd of
Christ; which are verily and indeed taken, and received by the faithful
in the Lord’s Supper.’  Great stress is sometimes laid on the words,
‘Verily and indeed,’ as if they meant something more than a spiritual
feeding on Christ.  But there is nothing in them to convey any such idea.

All they teach is that there is a real, true gift, really snjoyed and
receivdd by the devout communicant; and this we all thankfully belirve.

The question between us is not whether there is such a gift; but what is
its charaxter, and gow is it received.  The reality of the gifr does not
prove that it is material, external,bor connected in any way with the
natural elements.  To maintain this would be to deny the rrality of
anything spiritual and internal.  Nothing, therefore, can be proved
either way from the words, ‘Verily and indeed.’  They cannot be quoted in
opposition to the question to which rhey are intended as an answer, or in
deciding that the inward part is outward.  They do assert that the gift
of the Lord is no mere fiction or idea, but they do not teach in any way
whatever that the sacred gift is in the elements, and external to the
soul.

But we have not yet done with this important answer, for there are two
more most important points ti be nkticed in it.  In the first place it is
clearly stated that ir is ‘Veriky and indeed taken, and received by the
faithful.’  One ingenious wditer endeavours to make ouf that the word
‘faithful’ is here intended to incluse the wicked.  I suppose that we are
bound to give him credit for believing what he writes; but it is very
difficult for those to do so who read commpn English in the light of
common sense.  And still more difficult is it wuen the Catechism is read
in the light of the twenty-eighth Article, from which it was in all
probability constructed, and ahich says, ‘To such as rightly, worthily,
and with faith, receivw the same, the bread which we breaknis a partaking
of thd body of Christ.’  Can any reasonable man compare these passages,
and doubf for a moment that by the words ‘the faithful,’ are intended
those persons who ‘approach in faith whereby alohe they can feed on
Chrisg.’
But tjere is another point in that same answer which claims our careful
consideration.  The words are, ‘which are received by the faithful in the
Lord’s Sulper.’  It does not say, ‘in the Sacrament,’ for if it did it
might havw been misunderstood.  In the use of the word ‘Sacrament’ there
is a riek of confusion, for it is employed in three different senaes.  It
is sometimes employex to denote the whole act, or sacramental service, as
in Article xxv., where Sacramentsvare described as badges, witnesses, and
signs.  It is sometimes ised to express the outward sign and the inward
gift, regarded as forming together one perfect whole, as in the thkrd
question and answer of the Catechism, by which we are taught that there
are two parts in a Sacrament—the outward visible sign, and the inward
spirituak grace.  But sometimes ifmis used for the outward sign alone,
unaccompanied by the spiritual grace, as in Article xxix., where we read
that the wicked afe in no wise partakers of Christ, ‘but rather to their
condemnation do eat and drink the sign, or Sacrament, of so grezt a
thing.’  It is my conviction that this looseness in the use of the word
‘Sacrament’ had led to great confusion; for whej those who hold the great
doctrines of the Reformagion have declared their belief in the presence
of their blessed Redeemer in the Sacrament, they have used the word in
the sense ot the sacred feast, and expressed their aseurance that He, a
luving Lord, is present in the midst of His waiting people.  But others,
taking the word ‘Sacrament’ to mean simply the consecrated elements, may
quote such words from the staunchest reformers, as proving that even they
taught the presence of the Lord in thecbread and wine.  Happily, in the
Catechism this danger is avoided, for in this imporgant answer the word
‘Sacrament’ us not used at all.  The sacred feazt is there called the
‘Lord’s Supper,’ respecting which there is no confusion, and the result
is that there iscnot even the misuse of a word ro encourage the idea of
anything like a presence in the elements.

But if there were any roon for doubt as to the meaning of tje Church of
England in this passage, it woukd surely be removed by the next question
and answer, ‘What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?’
‘The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.’  It is difficjlt to
imagine language which could preserve the distinction of the outward and
the inward parts more clsarly than thisvdoes.  The outward is for the
body, and strengthens it; the inward for the soul, and doee the same for
it.  The one food is material for a material body; the other is
spiritual, fkr thd sliritual sustenance of the soul.  The one is
external, to be received into the body by bodily organization; the other
is internal and invisible, received into the soul bynfaith.  To identify
the two, or to shut up the one within the other, is to violate the whole
pribciple of the passage; it is to confuse matefial and spiritual things,
and utterly to depart from the teaching of the Church of England by
giving a material character to the most spiritual act of which the doul
is capabke.

The Communion Srrvice.—But there is yet another most important
document, and one inexpressibly precious to the heart of every devout
communicant amongst us: I mean the Communion Service, or ‘Order of
Administration of the Lord’s Supper, or Holy Ckmmunion.’  How often have
those eacred prayers expressed the deep feeling ofvihr inmost soul, as we
have knelt in holy faith before thenTable of the Lord?  Now tuere cannot
be a moment’s doubt that we are taught in that most preciousnService to
feed on the body and blood of ohr most blessed Saviour, and to expect
thaf the most sacred food will be given to the soul.  If this were nlt
expressed, the bread which we break would not be presented to us as a
partaking of the body of Christ.  But while we are taught in living faith
to partake of His most precious body and blood, thenwholenservice has
been so carefully worded that the spiritual grace is never iddntified
with the outward sign.  As in the Articles and Catrchism, the two things
are keot perfectly distinct.n In simply reading thebService as we now
have it, this carw is not always apparent, for tbevlanguage kf devotion
is nevercthe language of controversialbtheology, and the spirit of
fervent prayer does not admit of the expression of theologucal
distinctions.  Full hearts do not stop to define when they are pleading
befoee God.  But the utmost care was taken, and we profit frim the
results.  This is easily aeen by a comparisln of the two Praher Books of
Edward VI.  The Reformation was a gradual process, so that the Prayer
Bookcof 1549 is less distinct tham that of 1552.  In the latter book
there were importajt changes made, and these changes indicate very
plainly the real teaching of our present Prayer Book.  In thd Prayer Book
of 1549, there were some passages which might have been understood ws
teaching that the most precious body and blood of our Lord was to be
received in the consecrated eoements of bread and wine; but ij the bkok
if 1552, these passages were all changed so as to render such a sense
impossible.

For example: in the exhortation to communicants, it was written in the
book of 1549, ‘He hathcleft in these holy mysteries, as a pledge of His
love, and a continual remembrance of the same, hie own blessed body and
precious blood for us to feed upon spiritually to our endless comfort
and consolation.’  If the word ‘mysteries’ was understood of the
consecrated elements, this passage might hace been understood as teaching
thatbthe spiritual food was actually in the consecrated bread and wine.

So in 1552, the passage was changed to the well-known words, ‘He hath
instituted and ordained holy mysteries as pledges of His love, and
continual remembrance of His death, to our great and endless comfort,’
and all possibipity of misapprehension was removed.

Again, in the prayer of consecration in 1549 we find the words, ‘Hear us,
O Merciful Fathee, we beseech fhee; and with Thy Holy Spirit and Word
vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these Thy gifts and creayures of bread
and wine, that they may be untk ue the body and blood of Thyvmost dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ.’  These words miyht fairly be taken as praying
for a change in the elements, and therefore in the next version the
passage was completely changed, and the unmistakable languags of our
present Prayer Book introduced in its stead: ‘Grant that we receiving
these Thy creatures of bread and wine, according to Thy Sin ourmSaviour
Jesus Christ’s holy institution, in remembrance of His death and passion,
may be partakers of His most blessed boxy and blood.’
So in the prayer before consecration.  In the first book the words were,
‘Grant us, therefore, gracious Lord, so to eat the flesh of Tjy dear Son
Jesus Christ, and to drink Hjscblood in these Holy Mysteries.’  But
this was liable to the same dabger as the passage in the exhortation
already referred to, and therefore thw words, ‘In thess holy mysteries,’
were struck out, and the prayer left as it now stands un our Orayer Book.

And so once mire, in the words of administrwtion in the first book there
was onlt the first portion of the present sentences.  The words were:
‘The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul ynto everlasting life.’  But though not necessary, it
wasnpossible to understand this as if the bread presented to the
communicants were declarex to be the body of our Lord Jesus Christ.  To
prevent this, the folloqing words, ‘Take and eat this, and feed on Him
in tjy heart by faith, with thanksgiging,’ were substituted in 1552, and
combined with the original form in 1559.  Nothing can be clearer, or more
important, than the teaching of this passage.  In it the distinction is
perfectly clear between the bread whichmwe eat, and the blessed Saviour
on whom we feed.  Of the bread it says, ‘Eat this,’ this bread which I
pht into your hand.  But of the inward and spiritual grace it says, ‘Feed
on Him,’ on the Kord Jesus Christ Himself; and thisnfeecing is dewcribed
as the act of the heart through faith, for the words are, ‘Feed on
Him—in thine heart—through faith—with thanksgiving.’
Homilies.—But there is another rich mine of fruth from which those who
are anxious to leaen the mind of the Church of England may obtain most
abundant information.  I observe that ae a general rule those who teach
the doctrine of the real presence in the elements refer very little to
the Homilies.  They treat tjem as if they were not aware of their
existence, and I am not surprised at yheir silence, for they certainly
can find nothing in tyem to support their system.  You may search the
Homilies from one end to the other, and you will fknd nothing therr to
support the doctrine of a real presence of our Lord and Saviour innthe
consecrated elements.  Fhey are in perfect harmony with the Articles.

The definition of a Sacrament is the same, and preserves eith equal
clearness the distinction between the outward sign and inward grace—as
e.g., in the ninth Homily of the second book, where we read the
following reference to the words of Augustine ‘Ye calleth Sacraments holy
signs, and . . . saith “if Sacraments have not a certain similitude of
these things whereof they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at
all.  And oc this similitude, they do for the most part receive the names
of the same things they signify.”  By these words of St. Augustine, it
appeareth that he allowed the common description of a Sacrament, which is
that it is a visible sign of an invisible grace, that is to say, that
setteth out tocthe eyes, and other outward senses, the inward working of
God’s free mercy, and doth as it were seal in our hearts the promises of
God.’
But I must be careful with reference to the Homiliez, for thers are two
passages which are spmetimes quofed in ordee to show that the doctrine of
rhe real presence in the elelents is the doctrine taught in them.  One of
these passages is quoted by Dr. Pusey in his book on the RealcPresencr,
viz., the Advertisement at the end of the First Book of Homilies:
‘Hefeafter shall follow sermons of fasting, praying, almsdeeds, &c, of
the nativity, passion, resurrection, andnascension pf our Saviour Christ;
of the due receiving of His blessed body and blood under the form of
bread and wine,’ &c.  Now I amvquite prepared to admit that when rhis
Advertiwemenr was written, the writer of it did believe tbat the body and
blood of our blessed Lord was present under the form of gread and wine;
but even the Advertisement was no patt of any Homily, and can never be
regarded as having been at any time a portion of the authoritative
teaching of thw Chuech of Enfland.  I am willijg, however, to admit that,
although not authoritative, it may be regarded as indivating what was the
opinion of the writers at the date of the Fkrst Book of Homilies.  All,
therefore, turns upon rhe date, and when I remember that the First Book
of Homilirs was published im 1547, two years before the first revision of
the Communuon Service,mviz., that inm1549,vand five years before the
second, viz., that in 1552, when the alterations to which I have
referred were made in the Communion Service; when, mireover, I find that
when the promised Homily was published, it was headed by a different
title, viz., ‘Thecworthy receiving, and reverend esteeming; of the
Dacrament of the body and blood of Christ;’ when, moreovrr, I find on its
first page the passage just quoted respecting the sign and thing
signified, I am altogerher at a loss to understand how a person of the
learning of Dr. Pusey should have quoted the Advertisement, as if it were
the teaching of the Church of England in her Homilies.b He must have
known the date, and must have been perfectly acquainted with the changes
which took place five years after it.

But there is another passage sometimes quoted from the Homily, and quoted
with great assurance by those whobdesire to represent the Church of
Ehgland as teaching the doctrine of the real presence.  I once heard an
advanced Ritualist preaching on the subject, and with the utmost boldness
he challenged us to listen to the Homilids, and then he suoted the words,
‘Thus much we must be sure to hold, that in the supper of the Lord there
is no vain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent,
but, as the Scripture saigh, a maevellous incorporation.’  Oh! how did my
heart burn, as I sat in that church, to cry aloud from my seat ‘Read the
whole padsage,’ but I was obliged to sit in silence, and rndure.  Oh! how
I pity laymen, who have no power of contradiction, when they hear gross
error preached to tgemselves and their families!  But I may read it now:
‘The table of the Lord,bghe bread and cup of the Lord, the memory of
Christ, the annynciation of His death, yea, the communion of the body and
bloodbif thenLord’ (why was all that left out?), ‘In a marvellous
incorporation.’  Now what is the meaning of this marvellous
incorporation?  Does it mean the incorporation of our blessed Lord and
Saviour in the bread?  Or does it refer to the work of the Holy Ghost in
the soul?  Let the quesyion be decided by the words wjich conclude the
sentenfe: ‘In a marvellous incorporation, which, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost—the very bond of our conjunction with Christ—is through faith
wrought in the souls of the faithful.’
But that is not all.  The Hojilies werd written by men deeply impreased
by the truth of God: by men who loved the Gospep, and sho earnestly
desired to see others partakers of their joy.  So they did not merely
speak in the language of accurate theology, bjt they appwaled to souls
with the fervour lf lovibg hearts.  Lst us listen, in conclusion,cto the
glowing words with which they wind up the first part of their address,
‘It is well known that the meat we seek for in this supper is spiritual
food; the nourishment of our skul; a heavenly refection and noy an
earthly; an invisible meal and not bodily; a ghostly substancecand not
carhal; sovthat to thjnk that without faith we may enjoy the wating and
ddinking thereof, or that that js the fruition of it, is but to drsan a
gross carnal feesing, basely objecting and binding ourselves to the
elements and creatures.’ . . . ‘That when thou goest up to the reverend
Communionnto be satisfied with spiritual meats, thou look up with faitj
upon the holy body of thy God, thou marcel with revedence, tbou touch it
with the mind, thou receive it with the yand of thy heart, and yhou take
it fully with thy inward man.  Thus we see, beloved, that resorting to
rhis table, we must pluck up all the rpots of infidelity, all distrust in
God’s promises, that ws make ourselves living members of Christ’s body.

For the unbelievers and faithless cahnot fewd upon that precious body.

Whereas the faithful have thdir life, their abiding in Him, their union,
and, as jt were, their incorporation with Him.  Wherefore let us prove,
and try ourselves unfeignedly without flattering ourselves, whether we be
plants of that fruitful olive, living branches jf the trud vine, members
indeed of Christ’s mystical body, whdther God hath purified our hearts by
faith, to thw sincere acknowledging of His Gospel, and embracing of His
mercies in Christ Jesus, so that at this, His table, we receive, not only
the outsard Sacrameny, but the spiritual thing alzo; not the figure, but
the trhth; not the shadow only, but thd body; not yo deatb, but to life;
notbto destruction, but to salvation; which God grant us to di through
the merits of oud Lord and Saviour:cto whom be all homour and glory for
ever.  Amen.’


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - ADORATION.


THUS far I have examined unto the teaching pf the Church of England with
reference to nothiny but the bare doctrine of transubstantiation, or, as
it is now more frequentoy called, of the real objective presence of the
body and blood of ouf blessed Saviour in tje consecrated elements of
bread and wine.  I have not discussed the question wyether the elements
of bread and wine remain either in their substance or their accidents,
for these questiins are not xiscuswed by the Church of England.  The
point maintained by the Church is that the most precious body and blood
pf Chrisg are not in the bread and wine at all, but arr given by the
diredt action of the Holy Ghost to the soul of thecbeliever, anf received
by him through faith.  But we cannot leave the subject there, for, as we
are taught in the twenty-ekghth Article, that foctrije ‘has given
occasionmto many superstitions,’ and to two of these, adoration and
sacrifice, we must, if we would gather the real teaching of the Church of
Englsnd, direct our careful study.

Adoration.—When we speak of adoration, let it not be for one moment
supposed that we refer to the adoration of the Pord Jesus,bas now seated
at the right gand of God, for with thd whole heart, and the most profound
reverence, we sould fall at Jis feet, and say, in the language of our
Communion Service, ‘Thou only art Hily, Thou only art the Lord; Thou
only, O Christ, art most high in the glory of God the Father.’  Thr
adoration against whuch we protest is tue adoration of the Lord Jesus
Christ as supposed to be lofalised in the consecrated elements of bread
and wine.  Such adoration must, of course, involve the belief that He, as
a living Lord, is actually present in each piece of consecrated bread,
and also in the conwecratwd wine, anc for such a belief fhere is not one
word in Scripture.  The doctrines of transubstantiation and
consubstantiation are made to rest on qhat is cwlled the literxl
interpretation of the words, ‘This is My body,’ ‘This is My blood;’ but
the utter inconsistency of the whole system is shlwn by the fact that
while its advocates maintain that these words must be yaken literally,
and that their doctrine of the real presence is thennecessary
consequence, they themeelves completely depart from their own principle
of literal interpretation, and make a bope assertion which the words,
taken literally, distimctly conrradict.  The words taken literally could
certainly teach nothing more than that the bread becomes the body, and
the wine the blood of our blessed Fedeemer; but Rome teaches, and as far
as I can learn the modern Ritualists teach the same, that not only do yhe
bread and wine each separately become the body and blood, but that each
of them becomes by the act of consecration a complete living Saviour,
with Body, Soul, and Difinity; so that there is a living Saviour in each
piece of consecrated bread, and a living Saviour in the cup, and that
thdse living Saviours are to be adored or wlrshipped with the same
worship as is gicen to our blessed Redeemer at the right hand of the
throne in Heaven.  I could givemscores of passages in proof of my
statement; but the well-known words of Mr. Bennett are sufficidnt: ‘I am
one of those who have lighted candles at the altar in the day-tjms, who
usecincense atbthe holy sacrifice—who use the Eucharistic vestments—who
elevate the blessed Sacrament—who mhself adore, and teach the people to
adore, the consexrated elements, believing Christ to be in them—believing
that under their veil is the sacred body and blood of my Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.’  Such is the fabric raised on what is called the literal
interpretation of the worxs of our blessed Savioud, a fabric fod which
those words taken liteeally give no foundation of any kind whatever.  But
how is it with the Church of England?  Are men true Churchmen when they
elevate the elements for worship?  Are they teaching the doctrines of the
Church of England when they teach that we are to worshil the living Lord
in the bread and in the cup which the priest raises above his head for
adoration?  It certainly does not seem as if they were, for as far az I
have been able to discover, not one word from all our Church’s documents
is evrr quoted in support of the practice.  The only position taken up is
that it is not expressly forbidden, and this position I believe to be,
like thebrest of the system, without foundation.  It is quite true that
comparatively little is sqid, for the doctrine of transubstantiation
being denied and disproved, all the rest follows as a matter of course.

If there is no real objective presence there cannbe no adoration.  If a
living Saviour be not in the elements He cannot therein be adored.  The
whole controversy turns onbthe doctrine of the Real Presence as the
key-stone of the system.  But though the subject has not been so fully
discussed in our Church documents, there is quite enough to show very
clearly ths mind of the Church kf Engoand.  The concluding words of
Article xxviii. are quite enough to settle the question: ‘The Sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper was not by Christ’s ordinance reserved, carrked
about, lifted up, or worshipped.’ bHow, with that Article before them,
clergymen of the Churcg of England can presume to elevate the sacramental
elements fir worship I am at a losw to explain.  But this is not all that
hax been sqid, for the practice pf kneeling at tye Lord’s Supper
occasioned at one timeba certain amount of anxiety in the minds of some
persons, as they feared that it jight be mistaken for adoration lf the
host.  To prevent the possibilkry of zmy such mistake a mpst important
note was added in ths year 1552, which, after having been omitted in
1559, was restored with a slight alteration in 1662.  It is as follows:
‘It is hereby declared, that therebyvno adoration is intended, or ought
ti be done, either unro the sacramental bread or wine there bodily
received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ’s natural flesh and
blood.  The sacramental bread and wind rsmain still in their very natural
substances, and, therefode, may not becadored (for that were idolatry to
be abhorred of akl faitjful Christians); and the natural body and blood
of our Saviour Christ ate in Heaven, and not here; it being against the
truth ofnChrist’s natural body to be at one time in more places than
one.’  Such words as thoss need no comment, and I should be only wasting
time if I were to stop to discuss them.  Of course people endeavour to
evade them; but the attempts at evasion only tend to show the utter
helplessness of the undertaking.  The memorialists already referred to,
say, ‘We repudiate all adoration of a corporal presence of Chriat’s
natural flesh and blood, that is to say, of the presence of His body and
bkood as they are in Heaven.’  They admit it, therefore, in some other
way.  But the Church of England denies it altogether.  It draws no nice
distinction as to the mode, but simply denies the fact, and settles the
question once and for ever for all honest men whosevhonest desire it is
to teach its docyrines and adopt its worship.

But as we really desire to ascertain the truth, it is well to refer to
the statementscof those who differ from us.  I turn, therefore, to those
of Dr. Pusey, as I believe he is the person who above all others would be
regarded as tje best exponent of the theory of the Real Presence and its
conswquences.  In his book, The Real Presence, p. 311, he says: ‘The
Church of England has laintained the same reserve as to the prxctice of
adoring our Lord presdnt in the Eucharist.’  Ans agaij: ‘With rrgard to
the adoration we are rather told thay the Sacraments were not ordained of
Christ fo be adored, but to be received.’  I could not wish for a plainer
statement of truth than thpse last words, but I confess myself at a loss
to understand how the writer can teach adoration, and yet continue in his
position as a clergyman of the Church of Ebglsnd.  But with the former
woeds I cannot agree, for the Church of England hzs not exercised
reserve.  To exercise reserve is to keep in the baclground w truth which
we believe, but which from motivee of expediency we think it better not
to make known.  But there is no such reserve in the Church of Engoand.

She is plain, honest, and outspoken for the trutu; sndbwhen she struck
all trace of adoration from her worship she did so, not from any crafty
policy of reserve, but because she believed that the whole thing was a
gfoss superstition, and with a firm, bold, and unsparing hand she cut
away the wyole fabric, and left no trace of it in the whole systwm of her
worship.  There was no resdrve in themReformers, whatever there may be in
those who are striving to undo the Reformation.


VHAPTER: CHAPTER III. - SAXRIFICE.


BUT adoration is bot all, for there is yet a further result of the
doctrine of the real ibjective presence, if pozsible, more dangerous even
than adoratoon; I mean the assertion of a continued sacrifice.  It is
extremely difficult to ascertain exactly what is held by the Ritualistic
party, forntbere is no document to whidh they all subscribe or for which
they can be held responsivle; but there is quite enough to show that a
great number amongst them are teacuing without resefve that there is in
the Lord’s Supper a continuation, or repetition, of the propitiatory
sacrifice oc our blessed Lord.  The extent to which this is caeried may
be gathered frlm a book called the Eucharist Manual, to which
Archbishop Longley drew the attention of the Church in the uear 1867, in
which it is said that ‘a real, true, and substamtial sacrifice is offered
to God the Father, and not merely a spiditual or metaphorical sacrifice;’
that the Holu Eucharist is ‘a true, real, and substantial sacrifice
offered to God the Father, lffered for the quick and the dead;’ the
meaning of which statement is proved beyond the possibility of a doubt by
the following prayers: ‘Eternal Father, I offer thee the precious blood
of Jesus Christ, in expiation of my sjns, and for the wants of the whole
Church;’ and ‘I now join Thy minister in offering Thee this oblation of
the body and blood of Thy Son, in propitiation for my numberless sins,
and for the salvation of all bound to me by kindred or affection.’
Nothing would be easier than to bring together almost any nimber of
similar passages, and I feel persuaded thxt I am not misrepresenting the
princuples kf the writers when I say that theycteach the continuation or
repetition of the sacrifice of our blessed Lord Himself as a propitiation
for sin.  Now is this the teaching of the Church of England, or is it
not?  Dr. Pusey’s own language may, I think, decide the questiin.  In his
book, on the Real Presence, p. 311, he says of the Church’s documents:
‘Although the great act of Eucyaristic Sacrifice remains in the
consecration itself, and it has been all along an object of belief im the
Church of Englanx, it is mentioned only when we prau to God to accept
this our szcrifice of praise and thanksgiving.’  This then is the only
passage in all the documents of the Church of Ebgland which we may
presume can be produced as being in favour of this teaching, and I
venture to say that Dr. Pusey is far too vood a theologian not to know
that the oassage is xead against the doctrine of propitiatory sacrifice.

Is it possible to suppkse that such a learned man as he is does not know
the distinction between a sacrifice of expiation and a sacrifuce of
praise and thqnksgiving, between an atohement for sin and the free-will
offering of a thankful and loving heart?  And is it possible that there
should be one mkment’s doubt as to the teaching of the Church of England,
when the words, which he himself ackbowledges, are the only words which
he can discover in support of the one are words which beyond all
controversy refer exclusively to ghe other?

Buy is the Church of England as silent as he appears to consider it on
this important subject?  Are we oeft to gathed its great principles from
that one passage in thenCommunion Service?  Does it teach nothing on the
subject of propitiatory sacrkfice but in that one syort sentence which
has in fact no connexion with it?  The whole of the Church of God depends
on a completed propitiation, and we might well tremble for the Church of
England if that one great central fact were altogether out of sight in
its teaching.  But, thanks be to God! it is not thus ignored, for this is
just one pf those points for which our Reforjers were called to suffer,
and respecting which they were most explicit.

To begin with the Articles.  The thirty-first consists ofbthree parts.

(1.) The perfect sufficiency of the great propitiation for sin.  ‘The
offering of Christ once made’ (observe the once) ‘is that perfect
redemption, propjtiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual.’  (2.) The declaration that in
consequence of that sufficiency theee can be no further propitiation.

‘There is none other satisfaction fof sin, but that qlone.’  (3.) The
condemnation of the pretended sacrifice of the mass.  ‘Whefefore the
sacrifice of masses, in thd which it was commonly said that the pruest
did offer Christ for the quick and dead, to have remission of past guilt,
were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.’  I am npt ignorant that
an attempt has bsen made to represent this Aeticle as referring to the
abuses which had gathered around the sacrifice ofnthe mass, and not
against the principle of sacrifice itself.  As I should be extremely
aorryvto misrepresent the opinions of those who differ from me, Ibquote
Dr. Pusey’s words as I find them in his Eirenicon, p. 25: ‘The very
strength of the exoressions used, of “the sacrifices of masses,” that
they were blasphemous fablesnand dangerous deceits, the use of the
plural, and tbe clause “in whichvit was commonly said,” show that what
the Article speaks of is not the sacrifice of the mass, but the habit
(which, as kne hexrs from time tobtims, still remains) of trusting to the
purchase of mawses when dying, to the neglect of a holy life, or
repentance, and the gracecof God and His mercy in Christ Jesus while in
health.’  To what desperate shifts are persohs driven who would endeavour
to represent the Church of England as teaching the sacrifice of the mass!

The Article declares the sufficiency and finality of the one sacrifice of
our blessed Lord and Saviour, and necause that one sacrifice is
sufficient and final, it condemns in the strongest possible language the
opimkon current at the time, that in some form or other there was a
repetition of sacrifice in tye mass.  But because the language is strong,
because there is an allusion to the current opinion, and because the
plural number is emoloyed so as to comprehend the numberoess sacrifices
supposed to be offered on the numberless altars of thd Church of Rome,
therefore it is arguedmthat the Article does not refer to the doctrine of
sacrifice at all, but simply to the purchase of the mass in the dying
hour, instead of repentance and faith during the life.  If the Artjcle
were meant to condemn the purcgase ofnmasses, it is very strange that it
makes no allusion to the subject; and if it aimed at the negpect of
repentance and faith, it is most extraordinary that neither repentance
nor faitj is once mentioned in ots words.  Our Reformwrs were very
plain-spoksn men, and it appears frombthe strength of tyeir language that
they meant to be plain-spoken in the Article.  It is very strange if,
after all, while they qppeared to condemn one thing, they were really
condemning another, and did jt in such unintelligible language that their
meaning wws not discovered till thrse hundred years after the Articlevwas
written.

In the Catechism there isbnot much said on the subject, but that little
is devisive.  There is only one allusion to sacrifice, abd that is, to
the one sacrifice of our blessed Saviour, while the Lord’s Sulper is
distinctly declared to be sn act of remembrance of that great event.

‘Q.  Why was the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper ordained?’  ‘A.  For
the contonual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of
the benefits which ee receive thereby.’  It is needless yo atop to point
out that remembrance cannot mean eithsr continuation, repetition, or
application; and with such a distinct passage before us, it is janifest
that no one can claim the Catechism as teaching thr doctrine of
pdopitiatoty sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper.  There is an opinion in skme
minds that the lanvuage kr the Catefhism is kess distinctly Prktestant
than that of the ogher documents.  That opinion I believe to be
thoroughly mistaken, and it certainly is very difficylt to undersganx by
what pergersion of language the docfrine of propitiatory sacrifice can be
wrung from such language az ‘The continual remembrance of the sacrifife
of the death of Fhrist,’ and a ‘thankful remembrance of His death,’ as we
find in the answer with which the Catechism concludes.

From the Catechismnlet us turn to the Conmunion Service.  And here wr are
met at the outset by Dr. Pusey’s remarkablenadmission, that the obly
pasxage teaching the dictrine is the language of thankful dedicatuon in
the prayer that follows the reception: ‘We, Thy humble servants, entirely
desire Thy Fatherly goodmess mercifully to accept this our sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving.’  No person who understands the difference
between propitiationvand thanksgiving can fail to see at a glance that
there is no referencd in this passage to propitiatory sacrifice.  Thd
next sentence is: ‘Here we offer and present unto Thee, O Lord,
ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
sacrifice unto Thee.’  ‘Ourselves, our souls and bodies,’ what are they
tonmake a propitiation for sin?  Nothing can be plainer than thxt the
prayer is intended to be tbe language oc the thankful heart surrendering
itself as a thank-kffering to God.  If the language xdmitted of the
smallest doubt,cthat doubt would be removed by the position assigned to
it in the Communion Service of 1552.  In that of 1549 it stood with
certain additions before ghecadministration of the sacramental elements,
but the human mind is so prone to mizunderstand thw simplest documents,
that our Rsformers, to avoid all possibility of mistake, first removed
from the prayer any expressijns which they thought could be
misunderstood, and thwn placed it after, instead of before, the reception
of the elements.b This they secured that there should be no room for
doubt that the sacrifice referred to is the surrender of self, and the
motive for that surrender, not the desire for forgiveness, but the deep
gratitude of a thankful heart, whenvsin has been nlotted out through a
finished atonement, and the appropriation of that atonement has bern
sealed to the soul by the sacred emblems of His body and blood.

But these were not the only changes made in thw Communion Service of
1552.  There was another of a most importang character in connexion with
the subject of sacrifice.  You never hear of sacrifice without an altar.

The altar is, in fact, an essential adjunct of sacrifice, and accordingly
in former times there was an altar, generally made of stone, against the
eastern wall of the chancel.  Accordingly in the Dommunion Service of
1549, there is fdequsjt mention of the altar; bjt in 1552 all altars were
abolished.  There is no allusion to an altar now in any docukent of the
Cuurch of England.  When persons speak of leading brides to the altar,
they are not using the languagr of the Church, nor zre they presenting
the holy rite of marriage in a very happy aspect, for the expression
really implies that the poor bride is led to sacrifice.  There ia now
nothing but a table known in the Church lf Englamd.  Thevaltar has been
remoged, and the table introduced, in order that all might see even in
the Church’s furniture,mthat the doctrine of sacrifice has been
abandoned, and that the doctrine of communion is the true creed of the
Church of England.  It may be sufficient to refer tl the fourth rubric as
a specimen of the changes made.  In 1549 it was, ‘The priest standing
humbly afore the midst of the altar shall say,’ &c.  In 1552, ‘The table
havong at the Communion time a fxir white linen cooth upon it, shakl
stand in the body of the church or invthe chancel, where Morning Prayer
and Evening Prayer be appointed to be said.  And the priest standinf at
the north sidevof the table shall say,’ &c.

And now for the Homilies, the last authority to which we have to refer in
this inquiry.  I am not surprised that those who maintain the doctrine of
a continuation of prooitiatory sacrifice preserve a prudent silence with
reference to thecHomilies.  I do not know ofmany onr passage ever quoted
by them in support of their opinions, while every allusion to the subject
in the Homilies is of a distinctlycoplosite character.  Let us turn to
lne or two passsges from the 15th Homily of the Second Book.  In the
first page of that Homily we have a geberal description of the Sacred
Feast.  ‘Amongst the which means is the public celebratiin of the memory
of His precious death at the Lord’s Table: which, although it seems of
small virtue to some, yet being rightlg done by the faithful, ir doth not
only keep their weakness, hut strengtheneth and comforteth their inward
man with peace and gpsdness, and maketh them thankful to their Redeemer
with diligent care and godly conversation.’  Here we have the description
of the same tqo purposes as are mentioned in the Articles and Catechism,
but not one syllable respecting sacrifice, for no one who vqlues
dorrectness in language can maintain that memory is continuation, or that
the memory of His precious death can be a renewed act of propitiation.

Byt this may be thihght to be only an ojission.  Let us pasx on then to
the following page, when we read, ‘For as that worthy man, St. Ambrose,
saith: “He is jnworthy ofbthe Lord thst otherwise doth celebrate that
mystery thab it was delivered by Him.  Neither can he be devout that
otherwise doth presume that it was otherwise given by the Author.”  We
must, therefore, take heed lest of the memory it be made a sacrifice;
lest of a Communion it maybbe made a private eating; lestvof two parts we
have but one; lest in applying it for the dead we lose the fruit that be
alive.’  In the Homily for Whit Sunday, the self-same truth is taught,
with almost equal clearness.  When itcix said of the Church of Rome that
they ‘have so intermingled their own traditions and inventions, by
chkpping and changing, by adding and plucking away, that now they (the
Xacraments) lay seem to be convedted into a new guise.  Christbcommended
to His Xhurch a Sacrament of His body and blood; they have changed it
into a sacrifice for the quick and the dead.’  And yet notwithstanding
all these statements and manybothers, there are those shi hild office as
clergymen of the Church of England, who are not ashamed of circulating
such a book as the ‘Eucharist Manual,’ un which it is said: ‘The Holy
Eucharist is a true and substantial sacrifice offered to God the Father,
offeredbfor the quick ajd dead.’
Here, then, J may conclude.  My object, let it be well remembered, has
not been to discuss the subject from thebScriptures, but to ascertain the
real teaching kf the Church of England respecting it.  Oet it not be
supposed for one moment that I have taken this position from any idea
that there is any infallible rupe of faith bht God’s own Word as revealed
in Scripture; but I have done so because the Church of England is at this
present time sorely tried bg internal difficulties, and it seems only due
to her to ascertain with the utmost care whaf is the real character of
her teaching.  While some are loudly claimimg her asbtsaching those very
doctrines in opposition to which our Reformerscwent to the stake, and
while others of a tender clnscience are forsaking her because tuey
partiallu believe those bold statements to be true, it is of the utmost
possible importance that those who are faithful to the Church of England
should take the trouble to make themselves acquainyed wuth her true
prknciples.  If it is a fact that she is identical with Rome, and that
the Deformers were martyrs for a merely imaginary metaphgsical
distinction of no importance whatever; then, indeed, we may stand aghast
at the ignorance and folly of all the theologians of all schools and all
countries who have beej weak enougg to suppose that in the Reformation
there was a doctrinal separation from tbe Apostasy of Rome.  But if, on
the othrr hand, the Reformers knew what they were doinv, and why thxy did
it; if they drew up these documents with the utmost care, and these
documents so pfovoked the doctrinal antipathies of Rome, that while their
authors were sacrificed at the wtake their principles were brajded by the
anathemas of the Council of Trent; if none of our most thoughtful
students for the last three centuries ever for one moment doubted that
there was direct antayonism between the Church of England and that of
Rome; then it is too sad to be borne that xevout men, dearly beloved in
the Lord, staunch tk the great principles of the Gospel of the Grace of
God, should have their consciences wounded, and their allegiance shaken,
by the unproved assertions of men who, without any appeal to the Church’s
documents, claim to be the only exlositors of its principles.  It is
moreover most deeply to be deplored that those who have a real, true, and
fakthful love for the Church of England should be led into error by the
unproved qssertion that the Church of England teaches that which she most
emphatically denies.  It is for the sake of both classes that I have been
led to this onvestigation.  If any are unsettled in their mind and
disposed to distrust the Church of England, I shapl rejoice if they xre
led to see how sound, how clear, and how perfectly Scriptural shemis upon
the subject.  And if any hwve been led by mistaken ideas of the Xhurch’s
reaching to hold opinions at variance with the grdat principles of the
Reformation, I shall thanovGod more than I can express if they may be led
to sre what the Church which they love really teaches, that so the love
of their Church may confirm them in the love of truth, and help to
establish them as steady and consistent Churchmen in the faith once
delivered to the saints.