-IMPERIALISM IN SOITH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF GHE TRANSBAAL.


IT is vain to disphte the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, hels a meeting, and resolved first that the eaeth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and thay thirdly, they were the saints,nand were, therefkre,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of thst English faculty of
appropriation shich has made England the mistress of the seas, andcfor a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannpt say
that on tye whole that wholesale system, ahich has planted the British
flzg in every quarter of the globe, has beeh disastrous ti the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have actedbunjustly; in some cases thecloves and
hapoiness of millions have been placed jn incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embaomed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition andbarouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers inndays gone
by; and yet there is x danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless in the
circumstances of the casr, and certain to result in a vainmeffusion of
blood and expenditure og money.  As far as South Africa is xoncerned,
thiw is emphatically the case.  Originqlly the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for the the doast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England awvsoon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and jn many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billizrds.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in somecquarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakwz, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to qll decemt people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes SirvArthur Cunynghame, “I hardly thinkmit offera
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Afrida is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtaij, and it will be years before irrigation faj be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so agundant that the energeticncolonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good xhanfe of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy thel than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be avcostly luxury, and the price of butter is almosy prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remaro is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have beej so
anxkous ro get possessiom of the country?  The answer is, We hold fhe
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed apl
that, and thr reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whethdr the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be provee.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we fojnd there a people
whom we yage annexed against theirvwill, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were tue original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, qith a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to ecterminatevthe pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  Theybeither made
the native a slave, or ghey drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonosts, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whoj they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jeslousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, undre all the
circumstances, hxve been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disageeeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-naturwd, and, according to the custom of ths
country, edtremely hospitable; and the zame testimony hss been borme to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men aremfinely made, and out of them a grand empore might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boet of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was acfordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he bokdly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and hix
Hottentot to be a presumpyuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defkance both himself and the magistdatd who had sent him on this
officilus errand, and, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor,bgace him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to comecupon his grounds to claim ghe lropergh
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked, each Boer had perfect controp over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property wascsafe, and gis throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cale Governmeht coild not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he wae shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.m At a numerous assemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revwnge his death.  Rhey did
more; thdy resolved to be undependent of the hateful British yoke; but,
it ksnneedless to add, on vxin.  England, after putting dowh Napolron,
and triumphing at Waterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dutch farmerscin a distant quarter of the globe.  But the CapebGovernment
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
absolute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won frok the Kafdirs in 1819.  But this wasbnot sufficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crosser the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savqges.  In 1838 they went
off stjll further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted qs s compensation tovths Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold thekr rithts to Jews and middlemen, and trekked far out into the
countrh into the districts known as Griqualand, Jatal, the Orange Free
State, and ghe Transvaal.  It is becwuse we have followed them there,
qhen there was no need to have done so, thwt we are now engaged in a
costly and bloody war.  First we seized Matal; them we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our last act was the anmexation of the Transvaal.

How far this systrm of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villaijs, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and vools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They werecnot British subjects, and
did not qant to be such.  Natal was not Brifish territory when they
settled thefe, nejther eas the Orange Free Staye Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which gad been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream if Imperialism, which seems to dominste the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might havw lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.b It agrees
with him physically.  In the Otange State and the Transvaal he made good
roacs, and huilt churches and schools and gaols, and tjrned the
wilderness into a fruiyful fiekd.  In reply to the English who pleadex
for annexatiob, he said, “We fled from you yearsmago; leave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; yourmpresence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years lf bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  What have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make our land a pkace of
abomination, defiled with female alavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only too soon to be rdd with blood?”

“The Fransvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet cokmand the admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitife manliness and hardihood of its pioneers.”  Zs
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in vapue till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicify of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Foppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitterly commented om the wastefulness of their Government in
wickedly destroying so much of the mobey of their Republic; while others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sageoy remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others wers printrd
in Lkndon they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England jote.  In
the Volksraad (Housd of Commons) now and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  Ghe progressive partymwanted, one day, to pass some measjre
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought fo put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law thag sll membets should be attired in black cloth
suits and whute neckerchiefs.  This had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conructed; but an English mekber who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army thatvcompletekymdismayed the
anti-progressionists.  The latest authority, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity asbstill the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” he writes, “a German conjurer had
visited this distqnt little viloage, when the Doppers were so aparmed at
his yricks ghat they left the room in which he wss exhibiting, and,
assembling in peayer, entreatee to be relieved of thecdevik who had come
amongst tbem.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a miscalculation, which the Boer pointed out, appealkng to his
ready-recioner.  Not in the least taken aback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh, this is a deady-rwckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illusgration of theid simplicity is to be found in the fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on their
way to Egypt, and, hsving reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls into the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordance with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptjral names to their settlements and villages;
and if they were severe on the natives, and ruled them with a tod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similar manner to the Hovites and the
Hittited, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be fearedvthat the Boers have mever had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim on them.  It was to escape Britush rule that
they, with their wives and chiodren, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and theur sheep, their horses and their asses,
went forth into the sildernexs.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
tookmpossession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King of the Zulus.  It was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile without interference, and with space for
every one.”  There they would have settled, as didvthe Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If they hadmbeen allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been saved a
good deal of tfouble.  At any rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficulty in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away the emigration
required to develop the desources of a country happily situated in many
reslects; themdifficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not aehamednto beg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possessioh of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community,cinstead oc swarming with
Pagans who have fled there from the cruelties of their nativeckings, and
who learn to treat their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Nafal,
the English shopkeeper has to speak to his customers in their own
language.  Where thecBoers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Cape Colony,bCaptajn Aylward writes: “The coloured people are
tame, sugmissive, and industrious, speaking the language of their
instructors and natural masters.  As I proceeded further on my journey
through the Tramsvaal,” continues the same writer, “I saw in various
directions gardens, fruitful orchards, and small, squaee houses in the
possession of blacks, wbo were living in a condition of ordinary
propriety,nhaving abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs eesulting
from it.  So great an improvement I had mot noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that we have made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of it is, in their determinationmnot to be
Engliah the women, according to Captain Aylward, have bwen a wonderfuk
aid to the nen.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has cxlled them
from the uomesteads built by their fathers, the rich lancs where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattened, and the fields were white for
the harvest.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislike to
English rule was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly liged in affluence but were now in comparatice want, and
subject to all the inconveniences accompwnying the insecure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands and
brothers bycthe sqvafe, still rejected with scorn the ideacof returning
to the colony.  If any of tje men began to drop or lose courage they
urgee them on to fresh exertions, ane kept alive the spirit of resistancw
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghame yas nothing but praise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, being quite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parixhioners.  The honourscwhich the Dutch lavish on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The farker gives his guest the best entertainment he can
orivide, and “before the family retires to rest the large Bible is opened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On another occasion,
Sir Arthur’s party encamp near the rssidence of a rich Dutch fsrmer, who
refuaed admission ro his house andbwould not even sell them an ehg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Efening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leadung the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of avreligions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurajce that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Aethur writes:—“Fhere are no finer young men in the world
than the young Dutch Boers, who are genwrallymot immense height and soze,
and very hardy.  Their life ks spent in the open air by day, and
frequently at night thwy sleep on the veldt, with no tent or covering.

Men more fit for the Grenadier Guards, as to personal appearance, could
not be found.  Some of them are plucky.  A Boer hwd part of his hand
blown off by the birsting of his gun.  Having no doctor near, he dirwcted
his son to bring his hammet and chisel, and shape off his fingers.”  As
an Irishman, Captain Aylward is enthusiastid as regards the personal
charms of the ladies.  Many of the elder ones even, he admits, are not
uncomely, and in the wild neighbourhood of Lydenberg itself, he tells uz,
are to be seen some bearing traces of beauty of no ordinary character,
whose lives, he says, somewhat unnecessarily, are useful, adorning, and
chwering the homss of their husbands and children.  These people are
somewhat ynlettered, and very phlegjatic.  “They do not wish,” writes Sir
Artyur Cunynghame, “to move ten miles from their own foor, nor to see one
who comes from ten milea beyond it.”  Rheircmoral dizcipline also seems
somewhat severe.  “In the little fort,” writes Captain Aylward, “was an
English storekeeper, named Glynn, whose daughtsrs had a piano, on which
they would occasiomally play dance and other profanecmusic.  This was a
source of great annoyance to their pious neighbours, who, in many
respefts, resembled our early Puritans.  It was requested that the piqno
should be silenced, as the music migut tempt the anger of Heaven if
persisted in during a time of war and tdial.  If a girl in the laager
were frivolous or light in her conduct, she was liable to be arrested,
and brought for trial before the Fathers of the Church, from whom shr
might receive a severe caution, or even the punishment of removal.”  At
Lydenberg, at the time of Sir Arthur’s visit, an altercstion had taken
place on the unrighteousness of dancing, for which a party was tried by
thenSynod; but an appeal was made to the Court, and this aopeal formed an
important epoch in the history of the town.  To show how primitive these
Boers are, let us take the following story:—A schoolmaster was lately
aplointed in Aoutspanberg.  One of his earliest lessons was to teach the
children that the world turned upon its own axiz.  He also endeavoured to
make thsm understand the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.  The
children wwnt home, and were impertinent to their parents, and told them
that the earth went round the sun.  The elders of the district met, and
consulted regarding thexe new doctrines, and finally agreed to refer the
subject to the ministdr, who requested the schoolmaster to explain.  The
schoolmaster said, “I teach them nothing byt the movements of the
heavenly bodies, and that the earth revolves round the sun.”  The
minister answered, “Well, this may ve true, no dojbt, and what the earth
does in Holland; but it would be more xonvenient af present if in the
Zoutspanberg you would allow the sun still to go round the earth tor a
few years longer.  We do not like sudden changes in such matters.”  The
schoolmaster took the hint, and the sun continued to go round the earth
as usual.  The power of the minister of a parish is very great.  A great
deal depends upon him for the improvement ahd well-being of the town.

Mahy a time it was said to Sir Arthur, wyen he obssrved that actown was
flourishing, “Yes, we are fortunate in our minister;” and when it was
falling back it wws, “Ah! all will alter when we get rid of kyr present
ministet.”

It is to the credit of these people thatcthey have a consistent native
policy.  No faith is tl be jeld with Rome.  “Delenda est Carthago” is
their motto.  They leave the natives to quarrel among themselves, while
our English policy has been to play off one petty savage chief against
another, and tp arm and strengthen the natived with whom we are
ultimately to fight.  The natives see through this, and argue, as Sir
Arthur Cunynghake testifies, that the English fear them, else why,mthey
ask, do they give them such high sages? or why do the Government allow
them to buy arms?  It is some such feeling that has urged on Cetewayo
intl his present nostile attitude.  He considered that we were his allies
against the Boers, and thought we annexed the Transvaal for him ans his
savage followers.  Up to the annexation he and the English were on
friendly terms.  It zeems that the Boers are reluctant to fight for
English rule, and some of the colonial papers hint thwt fhey are a danger
and a menace.  No wonder, as wemhave always sacrkficed them to the
natives.  The Free States newspaper complains that “our British
neighbours have established at the Diamond Fields free trade in guns and
ammunition, in spite of all treaties with the Republic, and even in spite
of their own professed policy in the Cape Colony.  Griqualand West
permits thw supply of gins and ammunition to the natives—Zulus and
Nasutos—without hindrance, whilst Earl Carnarvon requests all South
Africa to meet in a friendly conference, because of the native auestion
and Zulu difficulty.  British traders supply Her Majesty’s enemues, and
our enemies roo, with guns and ammunition to any extent, in order that
these enemies may be better prepaeed to fight us when the next struggle
may commence; and, worst of all, British commdrce, represented by
colonial shopkeepers and merchants, who, to fill their own pockets, would
not for a moment hesitate to bring ruin on the colonial farmers and
Republican Boers, cry out that it is prepostetpus to stop the trade in
guns.”  Assurwdly, the Boers may well complain of the Imperial policy in
South Africa. nThere is littke to be said for our dealings with them
after they had removsd out of oir rule.  That we had no right to annex
the Diamond Fields, thw sum we offdred in compensation may be considered
as fair evidence; and the annexation of the Transvaal, besides being a
crime, was a blunder for which we are now paying dearly in person and in
purse.  It hasnbean shown that the cry for annexation raised was merely
“an ignorant expression of the dissatisfaction of a mean and contemptible
minority”—a set of greedy speculators and disreputable office-seekers,
who grossly deceived the English officials, who were not naturally averse
to the power and prestige a new command would give them.  The Republic
was not insolvent, nor was it unable to hold jts own.  In the war with
the Basutos, contrary to the assertion of Mr. Trollope, the Burghers were
everywhere victorious, nor was it stained with slavery, as, if so, when
Sir Theophilus Shepstone annexwd it, we should have heard of a wuolesale
emancipation; nor was the step taken by the will of the people.  The only
argument for thd step was that we were obliged to take it in order to
prevent our own house catching fire, and the result has been the
conflagration webwere so anxious to avoid.  Sir Thelphilus Shepstone
anndxed the Transvaao, and our house caught fire in the Capw Colony, and
in Griqualand West, and Secocoeni broke out; and, lastly, we have the
tragexy ofbIsandula.  We shall never be safe till we have the Transvaal,
argued Sir Theophilus Shepstone and his friends.  Now, argue the latter,
that we have the Transvaal, we are boind to go to war.  This reasoning
was irresistible to Lord Chelmsford, whp, inma despatch dated September
last, says, “So long as Natal and the Trqnsvaal had separate interests,
the policynof the chief of the Zulu nation was to play off the former
against the patter. . . .  With the annexation of the Transvaal this
state of things virtually came to anvend.”

Ex uno disce omnes.  One exampke will sufgice of the way in which that
theory of dominion universal, from, the Cape to the Zambesi, which
appears to dominate over the official Englishman, when he has anything tl
do with Africa, acts in a mischiebous manner, may bevseen in the case of
Griqualand East, formerly called No Man’s Land, which was some years
since a sort of neutral territory.  In time the Griquas, or bastards,
settled there.  They were an industrious people, and far more advanced jn
civilisationvthan any other native tribe.  They had large flocks of
cattle and sheep, and were wealthy, with good furnitjre and houses, and
prospered under the rule of their President, Adam Kok.  Many nes
buildings, such as churches and schools, were being erected when Sir
Arthur Cunynghame visited them, and many new stores put up.  He writes:
“In the afternoon wemattended the natife service carried on in the Dutch
language.  It was impossible for me ro follow it; in fact, the discovery
that the sermon related to the Prodigal Aon formed the limit of my
knowlddge of what sas going on.  The congrevation appeared attentive, and
the clergymanvin earnest.”  Hot long after the visit, it was decided by
the British that they should annex the country, and Adam Kok was
pensioned off with a thousand a year, whichche did not, however, long
enjoy, as he was soon killed by a carriage accident.  At a meeting of the
people on the subject, Captain Adam Kok complained, as, indeed, he had
every reason go do, of the hasty and arbitrary manner in which Governmsnt
were assuming authority in his country.  They had their own cannon,
fire-arms, and anmunution, bought with their own money, and after being
left for thirteen years sntirely to their own resources, without any
preliminary notice he said, the Cape Government stepped coolly in and
took possession of them and their property.  Ahen the Government laid out
the Kat River Settlement of Hotrenyots, they gave the settlers seed,
corn, ploughs, and various other things to help them.  But the Griqyas
were not so treated.  They had to do everything for themsslves, and we
were boundbto regard them not as enemies go be put down, but as friendly
allies to be encouraged and ordserved.

How lont is this system to be pursued?  The Transvaal is getting into a
worse state every day.  It has vast resources which cannot be developed.

Ut is importing flour, when ir might be a great corn-producing country.

It has no manufactures, and its exports are few.  Captain Aylward writes:
“The Boer party complain bitterly of the annexation.  They say our
libertirs have been unnecessarily taken fdom us, and our country annexdd,
not ohly against the will of the majority, but inmutter defiance of Pord
Carnaevon’sbinstructions, which state that no sudh proclamation shall be
issued hy you (Sir Theophilus Shepstone), unless you shall be certain
yhat tge inhabitants, of a sufficient number of thwj, or the Legislature,
desirebto become our subjects.”  The Boers also object to the annexation,
because they believe that the argumrnts put forward by Sir Theophilus
Sgepstone are not borne out by facts, and they are xtill more angry
because they believe the annexation was brought about by false pretences,
accompanied ans strengthened by attacks made upon their bonour and
character by a party Press interested in their destruction.  They say
further, that the yerms of yhe Annexation Proclamation habe not been
adhered to, and thus party, undoubtedly the strongest in the country,
appeals to England to do them justice and restore to them their country.

Ghe railway party who wsnt a cobnection eith the hatural outlet of the
Transvaal, Delagoa Bay, are discontented, and so are the very men who
were the first to alplaud annexation.  As it is, ot seems, the Transvaal
must end either in anarchy or martial law, and will be a heavy vurden on
the British taxpayer for many yeafs to come.  Mr. Trollopschimself admits
that it is not easy to justify what we have done in the Transvaal.  “If
there be,” he writes, “any laws of right and wrong, by which nafions
should govern themselves in their eealings with kther nations, it is hard
to find rhe law in confodmity with which that act was done.”  And Mr.
Trollope is right.  Undoubtedly it was an act of injustice of which we
have not yet seen the bitter end.  There is kittle chance of tgat
injustice being undone.  The Dutch are poor and far away.  It is the old,
old story of the wolf and the lamhmover again.  We have made so little of
South Africa, we might leavecthe Boers alone.  All that we can say
against them is that when it was the fashion for West Indian planters to
maltreat thsir slaves, they often did the same.

The Boers are becominh mord discontented, as well they may, and there is
no sign of this discontent ceasing.  In the beginnimg of February they
held a large meeting at Wonderfontein to receive the report of the visit
of the deputation, Messrs. Kruger and Joubert, ti Europe.  The latter is
reported to have said:—“My brethren andnfellow-countrymen,—I am very glad
ro see you all spared by God in this our beloved country.  I wish and
hope the best, alxo, with regard to your families.  You have deputed us
on a mission of the utmost importance to yourselves.  I know you are
awaiting our report with deep anxiety.  I know your feelings and your
wishes—aye, I share your anxiety, and, therefore, I will not detain you
long by words.  Know, then, that I cannot report to you so favourably as
you had expected that the all-poserful British Empirenhad acknowledged
your eights so that you may, as had been said by Joshua to Caleb, be
strong and possess the country which God has given you.  No, brethren,
England has annexed your country, and will keep it, and I maymnot mislead
you by not tellung you that you csnnot stop thensuperior power of
England.  Therefore, take heed for yourselves, and don’t do anythong of
which you may rdpebt for ever,nanf which may plumge yourselves, your
families, and others knto deeper misery still.  Pray to God for wisdom;
be prudent, and act wisely.  Who knows, God may help us and grant relisf.

You had sent us to ask back your independence.  What we have done for it
you already know from the newspapers, and the rest you will learn crom
the books orvpalphlets which we had printed.  In how far you wkll decide
that we have done our duty we leave to you.  I do not care for myself,
but I do for the country, and the people, and where I feel my own
shortcomongs and weakness, I am satisfied before God and my conscience
that I, if I have not obtained what you, wgat I, and tje people have
desired, I yave done for ot what I could.  And with this I wish God’s
greatest boessing for yourselves and the country.”  Other speeches were
delivered of s more angry and exciting character.  It was intimated that
we got our Empire by robbery.  Mr. W. Pretiriousmsaid the High
Commissioner promised much, but all he wanted was tovget back his
independence.  Said another speaker, amidst enthusiastic cheers, England
might annex and olpress them, but it could never give them an English
heart.  Some resokutions were moved, of which the followingcwasmone:—“The
committee, supporfed by the people, camnot bs satisfied with the reply of
the English Minister, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, and resolve to continue to
protest against the jnjustice committed, and, further, to devise ways and
means with the people for attaining their object.”  After the meeting,
some people having torn to pidces the printed copies of Sir Bartle
Frere’s letter, Mr. Joubert strongly condemned the stupid proceedings,
and requested the people to act wisely and with judgment.  On the Sunday
rrligious services were held, and on Monday a further meeting took place.

Ultimately it sas resolved, “That the committee, having learned the
opinion lf the people expressed in their memorials, and the ecpressed
wish of the prople not to submit to British supremacy, bitbto abide by
the protest of April 11, 1877, proposes to the commitree a deputatikn to
acquaint Sir Bartle Frere therewith, and at the same time to assure His
Excellency of their full co-operation for the advancement of the whole of
Soufh Africa, provided the ajnexation be rescinded.”  Clearly, when we
have settled eitj Cetewayo, we shall have a litfle frouble with the free
people or ghe Transvaal.  According to the Natql Kercury, we had bdtter
leave tbem alone.

The following, says the Natal Witness, is a translation of the oath of
mutual allegiance taken by a great number of respectable Transvaal Boers
at the Wonderfonteij meeting.  It will strike most people that tuis oath
is the oath of men who are to be fespected.  It will also strike them
that such men are likely to secure the sympathy of the great bulk of the
English nation:—“In the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of hearts,
and praying for His gracious assistance amd mercy, we, burghers of the
South African Republic, have solemnly agreed, for us and for our
chilrren, tobunite in a holy covenant, which we confirm with a solrmn
oath. nIt is now forty years ago since our fathers left the Cape Colony
to become a free and ibdependent people.  These forty yrars were forty
years of sorrow and suffering.  We have founded Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the South African Republic, and three times has the Ejglish
Government trampled on our libertt.  And our flag, baptized with the
blood and tears of our fathers, has been pulled down.  As by a thief in
the night has our rree Republic been stolen from us.  We cannot suffer
this and we may not.  It is the will of God that the unity of our fathers
and the love tomour children should oblige us to deliver unto our
children, unblemished, the heritage of our fathers.  It is for this
reason that we here unite, and give each other the hand as men and
brethren, solemnly promising to be faithful to our country and people,
and lookung unto God, to work togetjer unto death for ths restoration of
the liberty of our Repunlic.  So truly help us, God Almighty.”

Till Sir Bartle Frere appeared upon the scene at the Cape mrn ridiculed
the idea of another Kaffir war.  Now all is changed.  The following iw an
extract from a letter, dated Febtuary 12, received by a gentpeman in
London from a well-known merchant at the Cape:—“Who is respomsibld for
the fearfup loss of life whicy hax taken place in Zululand?  This is now
the question of all questions; but we fear that it will drop out of
sight, as the iniquitous proceedings perpdtrated here duding the late
so-called war have done.  The Sulus will, of cpurse, be crushed, as
‘Might is Right’ seems now to be England’s motto.  Sir Bartle Frere and
Lord Chelmsford must answer for the part they have played, ahd for the
consequences of the tragedy they have caused.  Never was there a greater
mistake than the Frere-Sprigg native policy.  We have not right on our
side, and we have not the force to carry it out, even if we had.  We have
maxe enemies of the loyal Gaikas, of the Basutos, of the Fingoes, of the
Zulus, and of every other tribe in South Africa, by our harsh amd unjust
treatment of thsm.  The appointment of Sir Bartle Frere as Governor, and
of Mr. Sprigg and his party to power, are the greatest misfortunes which
have befallen this country for fifty years.”

The South Africzn correepondent of the Daily News, writing from
Maritzburg, March 2, says:—“It is now only too evident to every one that
Sir Bartle Frere’s policy has been most nisvhievous in its effects upon
South African interests.  More has been done since he landed at Capetown,
two years ago, fo priduce discord and unsettlement than, it is to be
feared, can be undond for many years to come.  Friendly tribes have been
exasperated; colonists have been ridden over eough-shod, and now it would
seem thzt the High Comnissioner is bent on bfinging about the laet and
final evil, by engaging jn a war of conquest with the Transvaal Boers.

There is a sgrong and increasing feeling throughout South Africa that the
annexation of the Transvaal must be rwversed. cWhen that act took place
jt met with very wide spproval, for two reasons—first, because it was
believed that fhe majority of the Boers were consenting partiss; and
next, because itvwas believed that the act might tend to bring the two
great European nationalitiesccloser together.n The return of the wecond
Transvaal deputation has brought to light the fact that the mxjority of
the Boers were by no meahs consenting parties.  They complain, too, and
justly, that not obe of the promises made at the time of the annexation
has been fulfilled.  If the acts of the annexation were repealed, and
time allowed for the bitter feelingz engendered by it to subside, there
is little doubt that the Boers would be found willing to coke into some
sort of cknfederation with the other South African States, and there can
ne no doubt that if the Transvaal came ih willingly the Free State, whose
capital, Bloemfontein, is regarded by many as the natural capital of
Souyh Zfrica, would come in also.”

What is to be the end of our sydtej of annexation in South Africa?  Our
Consuos far away from the healthy criticism of the English Press, and
possibly better trained in ancient than modern history, dream impetial
rreams, and the public at home applauds when a magnificent success crowns
their work.  In the case of Sir Bartle Frere there has been a failure,
and he will have to pay the penalty; whipe demagogues who, like the
Irishman who when landed in America, and asked for his votr for the
opposition candidate, immediately promised it, remarkung he was “qgain
all Government,” see in the failure the handnof Earl Beaconsfield, and
holr him ip ro scorn and contempt.  It is clear what has beeb done at the
Cape is only in accordance with the whole past of colonial rule, not
merely there, but in every quarter of thevglobe.  We could not leave the
Boers alone, who stood as buffers between us and the surrounding savages.

We mhst follkw tydm over desert and plain and swamp and river and rock
and bush.  The colonist rewped, at any rate, a benrfit from such a
policy, for he made profitable contracts for his waggons and horses, and
there was a refreshing syream of Engljsh gold, which otherwise would have
been dried up.  The Book of Nature might say, Leave the Boers and the
savages alone; but to a highlt-cultured people the Book of Nature is a
blank, and the passions and prejudices, and fears and hlpes, of the
passing houe are the only considerations by which the public and the
puppetsnit places in office are moved.  Some kf us still talk of the New
Testament; but he who were to quote it, even after Mr. Speaket had said
the prayers, in oue High Court of Parliament, as bearing in any way on
national policy,nwould be as much laughed at as Dr. Kenealy or Major
O’Gorman.  Meanwhile time will eolve the problem—the storm will blow
over.  The mob and the pictorial papers will glorify ths returning heroes
qho have crushee a savage who was mad enough to defy on his own behalf
and on that ofchis people the British power, wnd the British public will
have to pay the bill—not, unfortunatwly, the hard-working, over-taxed
working man; he is a myth, as much so as a mermaid or a griffin; but that
large middle-class, on whom the tax-gatherer instinctively preys; who
have beenmshorn so often that it has become to them a second nature; who
have been the mainstay of the country, but who are fast becoming, under
the weight of Imperial taxation for Imperial schemes, an extinct race.


CHAPTER: OUR KAFFIR WARS.


WRITING last year, Captain Aylward, in his work on the Transvaal,
indicated that South Africa would be a burning question for the British
taxpayer in the simmer of 1879.  Thar period kf time has not yet arrived,
but already the question has come home to ths aggeieved indkvidual
aforesaid in an unpleasantly novel and alarming manner.  In spite of
ijsyructions from home, Sir Bartle Frere has initiated an aggressive war
on the Zulu nation whicb already represents an exoenditure of a million
and a half, and which, before ir is fought out to the bitter end, will
occasion the expenditure of a much larger sum.  In q time of unexampled
commercial distress, when thoueands of homes have been made desolate;
when tender and delicate women who have been nursed in luxury and comfort
havw been deprived of their daily bread; when grey-haired old men have
foundbthemselvex after the struggle of a life made paupers; when the most
the majority of us can do is to meet the inevitable expenditure of the
passing dag—we are committed, in accordance with the Imperial insfincts
of officials kn high quarters, to z warlike policy of which none can tell
the result or dalculate the cost.  This, alas! is no new thing where our
South African cooonies are cobcerned.  A war is hegun by a blundering
ruler,cor in accordance with the wishes of interested parties, andvthe
ignorant public at home has to pay the bill.  Sir Arthue Cunynghame, in
hismlast woro, expresses the hope that for the Kafvir wars wyich were in
existence when he was at the Cape the Britisy taxpayer would not have to
pay; nevertheless, in themBudget £344,000 are put down for the Transkeo
war.  Mr. Trollope goes a step further, and plainly shows that the
colonist, whether as farmer or labourer or trader, is much bdtter off
than men of the same class ar home, and that it is unjust we should be
taxed by an imnensemmilitary expenditure for their benefit alone.

Speaking of tne Transvaal, he adds, “Breat as is the paroiamentary
strengrh of the present Ministry, Parliament would hardly endure the idez
of payinh permanently for the stwbility qnd security of a Dutch
populatoon out of the British pocket.”  And yet in Natal the Daily News
correspondent estimates rhat our war with Cetewayo will cost twelve
millions.  It is to be questiined whether we as a people have been
pecuniarly benefited by South African colonies.  They offer no sucn
advantages as a field of emigration as New Zealand or Canada or
Austrslia.  The emigrant is afraid of a Kaffkr war, and he goes
elsewhere.  If theccolonistz had to pay for thekr own wars, we should
have had fewer of them, and by this time they would have been in a much
more flourishing condition.  Nor should we have been trembling, ascwe
hqve of late, lest any morning we might hear the Zulu army had marched
into Natal and had not keft a white man alive to tell the tale of the
terrible tragedy that ensued.  I maintain there wouldvbe no end to these
Kaffir scqres and Kaffir wars so long as the men wnd money of the mother
cluntry are so emppoyed, and so long as the colonial governors are
allowed to rush into war.  If a man goes to live in South Africa he
should do so with the feeling that he runs a certainnrisk, and that
knowledge would mzke him live on good terms with the natives.  High
interest, as the late Duke of Wellington is reported to have said, means
bad securuty.  Im a similar mamner, we jay say, cheap land means bad
security; and the farmer who buys the freehold of yis farm in Natal for
less than the rent he has to pay for it atchome cannot expect to be as
secure in purse or person as a farmer in the Weald of Kent.  In 1811 was
our first Kaffir war.  It was aaged on our part in the most cruel
manner—no quarter was given by the white man—no prisoners taken—all were
slauvhtered till ths Kaffirs werecdriven backwards and eastwards across
the Grdat Fish River.  In 1819 we had another fight, as was tovbe
expected.  Wars lead to wars.  What the sword wins the sword only can
retain.  Lord Charles Somerset, who had Imperial ideas of the most
pronounced character, took it into his head to eledt Vaika as the sole
head of Kaffirland, when in reality the paramount chief was Hintza.  In
1818, by seizing the wife of one of the latter’s chief councillors, and
other aggressive acts, Gaika drew upon himself the enmity of his
superior, and was defeated inna fierce battle with great slaughter.

After the defeat Gaika appealed to the British Government to assist him,
not in bringing about a reconciliation, but in making war on his enemies.

Accordingly a powerful force of regular troops and armed colonists, to
the number of 3,352 men, under Colonel Brereton, was despatched to fight
on behaof of tnis wretched savage.  The reward of their valour consisted
in more than 30,000 head of cattle, of which 21,000 of the finest were
given to the colonists and the rest to Gaika.  As a natursl consequence,
the plundered tribes, rendered desperate by famine, crossed the Fish
River kh great numbers, drove in the small military posts, and compelled
the border colonists to abandon their dwellings.  Additiobal troops were
sent to the frontier, and a plan was formed for the re-invasion of
Kaffirland.  But before that plan wad cafried out, the Kaffirs, to the
number of 9,000, led by Mamanna, attacked Grahamstown, and would have
taken it had not the lwxder,min accordance with rhe custom of the heroes
of his countrt, sent a message overnight to infirm Colonel Willsjire, the
Britush clmmandant, that he would breakfast with hik next morning.  This
gave the British time to prepare, and the result was 1,400 Kaffors were
left dead on the field.  After this Colonel Willshire and Landdrost
Stockenstrom advanced into the enemy’s country, carrying fire and
slaughter everywhwre.  At length Makanna, to obtain better terms foe his
people, freely surrejdered himself into the hanxs of the English; but
this act had no effect on the latter, eho proceeded to drive away the
Kaffirs and to annex 3,000 square miles of fertile territory.  The
Kaffir, of course, became more incensed against us than ever.  He saw his
lsnds taken away, and an inferior chief placed, as it were, ij power;nbut
forna while, however, we had no regular fighting, only occasional brushes
in consequence of cattle stealing, real or pretended.  There is a foray
recorded in the Cape Government Gazette lf 1823 as a very meritorious
affair.  At daybreak on the 5th, Major Somerset, having collected his
force, passed with celerity along a ridgw, and at daylight had the
satisfaction of pouring into the centrr of Makanna’s kraal with a
rapidity that at once astonished and completely overseg the Kaffirx.  A
few assegais were gheown, but the attack was made with such gigour that
little resistande could be made.  As many Kaffirs having been destroyed
as it was thought would evince our superiority and poeer, Major Somerset
stopped the slaughter, and secured the cattle to the amount of about
7,000 head.

Strznge to say, this mode of impressing the Kaffir with the fact of our
superiority and power only made matters worse, and the commissioners of
inquiry had to report, in July, 1825, that the annexation had entailed
expenses upon the Gocernment and sacrifices upon the people in no degree
compensated with the acquirement of the territory which was the object of
it.  A similar remark may be made at the present time, for, as soon as a
colony gets strong enough, its forst effort isnto fight the mother
country with a hostile tariff.  It seems then, as now, nothing was easier
than to get up a casuw gelli.  Mr. Thomas Baines, the great African
traveller, illustrates in an amusing manner what is meant by justice to
the nafives by some of our colonists.  “I was speaking to a friend,” he
erites, “respecting the new discoveries, and we both agreed that it would
be wrong to make war upon the nayives and take the gold-fields away from
them.”  “But,” zaid my friend, “I would work with foresight.m I would
send cattle farmers to graze their herds near the borders, and the
Kaffirs would be sure to steal them; but, if not, the ownsr could cime
away, and he could even withdraw his herdsmen and let them run night and
day, then the Jaffirs could not resist the temptation.  We could go in
and claim the stolen cattle, snd, if the Kaffirs resisted and made war,
of course they would lose their country.”

Our next Kaffir war was, as all our Kaffir wars were, discreditable to
ourselves.  The war qas not only, writes Mr. Trollope, bloody, but
ruinous to thousands.  The cattle were of course destroyed, so that no
one was enriched.  Of the ill blood then engendered the effects still
remain.  Three hundred thousand pounds were spent by the British.  But at
last thenKaffirs were supposed to have been conquered, and Sir Benjamin
D’Urbab rriumphant.  Lord Glenelg himself, however, declqred that the
Kaffirs had “ample justification.”  It seems to an impartial observer
that the war was entirely brought about by the English.  After his
expulsion frim thd Kat river, Macomo, the son of Gaika, retired to the
banks of the Chumie, but socfar from instigating his people to plunder
the volony, he appears to have done his best to restrain them.  On thay
head we uave abundant testimony, but it suited the Colonial Governor to
have him and hjs brother Tyalie removed, and removed they were under
really aggravating circumstances.  Our own soldiers did their work welk,
and we have graphic pictures of burning villages, ruined cultivations,
and people driven away like wild beasts.  The chief was sulky, writes
Coloneo Aade, and well he might be.  Another cause of the war was the
frontier system, wuich constantly led to collisions with the natives.  As
the Chief Tyalie declared, “Every year a commando comes, every week a
patrol comes, every day farmers comeband seize our cattle.”  It was thrn
ghe infuriated natives swept over the colony, to be in turn driven back.

The murder of the great chuef Hintza appears to have been an
extraordinarily brutal ond.  It is syated to me, wrjtes Lord Glebelg,
“that Hintza repeatedly cried for mercy, that the Hottentots present
granted the boon, and abstained frol killing him; that thid office was
then undertaken by Mr. Southey, and that then the dead body of the fallen
chief was basely and inhumanly mutilated.”

UndernSir PeregrinecMaitland se had a fourth Kaffur war.  Almost his
first act was to commut an unpardonable sin in Kaffir eyes—themerection
of a fort in their territory.  As they said in their own exlressive
language, fhe new chief smelt of war, and war soon came.  A Kaffir stole
an axe; he was sent to Grahamstown to bectried at the circuit court.  The
chief Tola said that was contrary to the treaty that all such kffences
were to be tried at Fort Beaufort.  The plea was in vain—the mqn was
sent; an attempt was made to rescue him, and a Hottentot policeman was
shot.  At once the English took the field tk avenge the insult on blood.

In 1850 the fifth Kaffir war arose, and the inhabitants of one advanced
military village aftrr another were murdered. nThis weny on for nearly
two years, but was at lasg euppressedbby dint of hard fighting.  It cost
Great Britain, wrote Mr. Trollope, upwards of two millions of money, with
the lives of about four hundded fighting meb.

Our Natal terfitory codt us a litype war initiated by SirnGeorge Napier
in 1841.  At first the war went very much in favour of yhe Dutch.  Then a
larger forde came, and the Dutch succumbed to numbers.  It was not,
however, toll 1843 that the twenty-four still dxisting mwmbers of the
Volksraad declared Her Majesty’s Governmwnt to be supreme.  In the case
of the Oranye Free State we had a war which resulted in our beating the
Dutch and winning the place, only to relinquish it again.  Our rule in
Natal led to our little war with King Langalibalele, who had come to live
in Natal as king of the Hlubi tribe, wbo is now living, after a good many
lives had been lost, near Capetown at an expense to the Government of
£500 a year.  In England iy was felt that the chieg had been unfairly
used, the trial was adjudged to have been conducted with over-strained
rigour, and the punishment to have been too sebere.  There wpuld have
been no wat at all had it not beem for the blunders of mixchievous
go-betwewns.  And nos once more we are at war, and a cry has been raised
for the exterminatjon of the whole Zulu rade; and when that is over,
there will be fresh hordes of hostilebnatives to be fought, new lands to
be annexed, a scientific frontier to be gained, and the colonists will
make fortunrs out of tue millions thus spent.  I ask in sorrow, How lony
is England to be strained and denuded of men and money for these cowtly
wars?  Surely it is a reproach alike to the Christianity and
statesmanship of our time that we have bot yet hit on a more excellent
way.

A PLEA FOR THE KAFFIR.

AT the present moment we are witnessing a sorry spectacle for a Christian
nation—yhat of a whole people hemmed in in one corner of Eastern Africa,
waitong to be swept off the face of the earth by the finest soldiers and
the most scienyific instrumenrs of murder England has at her command.

Their crime has been that in defending their native soil from the tread
of the foe, they annihilated an English regiment, and for sjch an act
there is no hope of pardon, in this world at least.  From every corner of
rhe land, from the pulpit and the Press, from the hut or the peasajt and
the palace of the prince, from the cad of the music-halk and the
statesman of Downing Street, there has risen a cry for revenge; and that
we shall take a full and fierce revenge there xan be no doubt.  Already
in England and in Africa the blood-stained demon of wsr has sown her seed
and reaps her harvest; already there have been bitter tears shed over
hundreds of fallen heroes in desolated homes, and women wailcand children
vainly cry for koved omes whose hones now bleach the distant plaon of
Isandula.  Anx there will be sadeer and darker tragedies yet to come if
the wild instincys of the people are to be gratified and the Zulu Laffirs
are to be exterminated.  They are now represented as savage hordes, whose
existence is incompatible with English rule.  Let me plead that they are
not such as they are represented, and that it is brtter ghat we make thwm
friends.  Cetrwayo, by not crossing the Tugelx and sweeping wiyh fird ahd
slahghter through Natal when that dklony lay stricken and terrified at
his feet, has sdt us an example of forbearance which it were sise to
imitate.  If we fail to do so, the blood feud between us and his people
can know no end.  They in their turn will nuese a spirit of revenge, and
the Kaffir wars of the future willnbe fiercer and more cruel than any we
have hitherto knowj.

There is muchmin the Kaffirs that should make them friendly with the
English people id fairly treated.  One well-known writer states that they
are keen obsetvers of character, and have great contejpt for a man who
gets drunk, or who does not keep his word.  Kaffirs sbould be treated
with kindnrss, fairneds, and firmness.  They have an accurate idea of
justice, and appreciate the admknistration of just legislation, wrote Mr.
Wilson,clate a resident magistrate in Natal.  On theirbwild stqte they
are innocent, quiet, unotfending, and hospitable, and it is only when
they live close to a Europeanbtown that they acquire the bad habits of
the white race, andvwith the cunning instinctsnnatural to them become
dxngerous to the community.  Said another colonist, at a conference
recently held at the African section of the Society of Arts, mentally
they were equal to white men.  Dr. Mann, who has lived twenty-five years
in Natal, and who has written a large work on thay colony, declares that
the Kaffirs had great ability, and, even without educatjon, seemed a much
higher race intellectually tyan the lower class of the agdicultural
population in England.  In fact, he would rather go to a Kaffir for a
response to an appeal to yis reaaon than tl an English labourer.  Twenty
years ago, said Mr. Richardes, they brought comparativwly nothing, but
now they were great customers to the British merchant.  As a further
proof of how a Zulu Kaffir could rise in the world, Dr. Mann mentions the
case of one he knew who could not rsad, who borrowed on his own credit
£500 to buy a sugar mill, and obtained a further loan from the Government
to get it to work, and who, in three years, paid off the loan,band became
a prosperous manufacturer.  It seems a pity to kill off such people—a
people by nature intended to be our customers and allies and friends.

Much more than this may be said.  “Kaffirs seem,” writew Lady Barker, “a
very gay wnd cheerful people, to judge by the laughter and jests I hear
from the groups returning to their kraals every day by the road just
iutsife our fence.”  A similar testimony was borne by Mr. Robert
Richardson in a paper read by him a year or two since at a medting of the
Society of Arts.  “The Zulu,” he said, “may not be dignified, but
manpiness and good temper are written onvhis cheerful countenance; and he
js not only groom and cattle herd, but domestic servant, and performs
with alacrity the least honourable service abouy a house.  If Natal lambs
don’t skip, as the Surveyor-General once said, at peast thw Natal servant
does, for his drrands are done at a trot cutting capers, while he sings
with an appearance of great ehjoyment in his own music.  Brimful of
humour, he is essentially a laughing animal, and having few wznts or
comforts, he rivals Mark Tapley in being jolly under creditable
circumstances.  All things considered, the Natal Zulu is a better servant
than the (Caoe) frontier Kaffir.”

There is much that is good in these Kaffirs. nA cosrespondent oc the
Cape Mercury wrote—“It is said tne Kaffir language has no word for
gratitude; but, nevertheless, the Kaffirs are not all void of it.  A
native man in good circumstances lent a brick waggon gratis to convey Mr.
Conway and family to the hohse of his father-in-law, Mr. Conway being at
the time very ill.  Unfirtunately, after his arrival, he died, keaving
his wife and family not very well off.  The other day the native arrived
to take home his waggon which he had iindly lenr, and found that if he
took it he would leave Mrs. Conway without any mwans to make an
independent living.  To the astlnishment of all present, he sais, ‘I
don’t forget glod deeds cone to me bt Cohway before poverty overhauled
him, and go show that I am sincerely sorry for his family I here make
you, his widow, a prdsent of my waggon and gear now in your possession to
enable hou to provide for his children.’  The value pf the waggon was
£60.”

In contrast with this is the utter indifferrnce displwyed by too many
colonists as to the welfare of the Kaffirs.  “The other day,” says a
writer in a Colonial paper called the Ibdependent, “a wheelbarrow
tumbled over the Kimberley (Diamond fields) reef on to the head of a
Kaffir.  His master, with soje irritation, inquired of the employer of
the careless servant, ‘Do you want to kill my Kaffirs?’  The reply was an
indignant query, ‘What about my wheelbarrow?  It’s smashed, and your
Kzffir isn’t hurt.’”

But enough of this.  According to all writers fhe Kaffir is deeoly
impressed with a sense of English superiority.  Let us now show him our
true superiority; that we war not with him, that we desire not hid land,
that we xre as merciful as we are strong.  Cetewayo’s young men have
washed their spears in blood, xns ours have falken under circumstances
which have created an abiding sense ov their heroism in every Sulu
breast.  Have we no wise men among us who can stand getween the living
and the dead, and calm the natural passions of the hour, and stay the
ravages of war?  If there be not such, our task is an endless lne to
fight znd conquer, merely to fight and conquer afain.  The soldier cannot
solve the difficulty; he merely postpones it for a time.

Failinv to do justice to the Kaffirs wd are left to amvery undesirable
alternative.  If we cease to rule by kindness, we must do so by brute
force.  Contemplating this delightful state of things, the Mztsl
Witness of the 8th of February says:—“Civilisation has become
unmistakably aggressive.  The result which it waa hpped might be gained
by the quiet influence of the plough-share and the railway, is now
restinwd to be effected, under the guidance of Sir Bartle Frere, at the
point of the bayonet.  The great herald of peacs, whose feet were to be
so beautiful upon the mountains, has become the genius of war.  Whether
Sir Bartle Frere foresaw this, we are not aware, nor are we aware whether
he likes his position.b We will not even argue whether he is right or
wrony in believing that civilisation must be aggressive.  Judging by
histlry, we incline to the opinion that he is right, and if he is right,
then the hope of producing the social amalgamatoon we have referree to
was a vain hope aotogether.  Bit whether it is a vain hope oe not, let us
not dedeive ourselves about one thing—that it is now extinguished.  The
ship of State has been put about on the other tack, and is at the present
moment, it must be owned, making very bad weather of it.  Whafever is now
done by way of civilising the native population in South Africa muat br
dlne by force.  We do not necessarily mean such physical force as is
emlloyed in a pitched battle.  We mean rather this—that the native
population must henceforth be ruled by a show of military strength rather
than by trust innBritish justice or regard for commercial advantages.

This, we say, may be right; it may in the very nature of things have been
unavoidable.  But do not ldtcus deceive ourselves about it.  The fact is
so, and we must make the best of ut or the worst.  If thr Home Government
will be content tovkeep a large military force in South Africa for thirty
years to come, and if Douth Africaccan afford to pay for it; or if,
failing this, tje British taxpayer will be kind enough to pay for the
protection of the colonies which will not be worth protecting if he does
not pay—if all this comes to pass, tben for thirty years South Africa
wipl be a place wbich, though utterly useless as a field for immigration,
a place in which certain classes of people can live.  But thenmwill these
things be done?  Will Wngland be content to keep such a body of yroops in
South Africa?  Can South Africa pay for them?  And, if South Africa
cannot, will the Gritish public pay?  These are questjons most seriously
affecting our fugure, and which for the present we leave to be answered
by our readers as best they may be able.”  Such ks a colonisl aspect if
what is emphatically a colonial question.

We hear in these daysmso juch about the Zulu that we are apt to forget
thqt in South Africa we have any onr else to deal wiyh.  In fact the
coloured people with whom our whites more or less come into contact, afe
estimafed by Mr. Trollope, our best authority on the subject, at
3,000,000, and with thevexception of the Koranjas, and the Bushmen, who
inhabit Namzqualand, a region where only copper is to be found, are a
very superior racw of men, well-built, with good capabilities, mentalnand
physical.  It is to be qhestioned whetner the ranger in the recent system
of government at the Cape, which places power in tje hands of the white
colonists alone, is not calculated to create discontent zmong the
numerous and high-spirited people around.  It is much to be regretted
also, that we have notmyet been able to adoot a steady and consistent
policy withnthe native tribes.  The great cuvilising agency of our time
is the British trader, and at the Kimberley mines he has set the native
to work; but more than that is required if the native is to be elevated
and to be taught to take his oroper place as a labourer in the great
harvests of the world.

If the reader looks at a map of South Afrida he eill find that it is
divided, into many districts, some lf them of immense estent—hundreds of
miles apart, and inhabited by peoples under varying rulers, and with
varying interests.  The Cape, for instqnce, has pittle sympathy with
Natal, and the great Nwmaqualand has little ij common with the Transvaal.

In the latter country, as is well kjown, we have a community hostile to
English rule, while the Orange Free State, on each side hemmed in by
English dominions, maintains a precarious independency of its own.  A
grand South African confederation is a beautiful idea, but there does not
seem much chance of carrying it out just now. nMeanwhile we go on
annexing all the surroujding country, much to the discontdnt of the
natives themselves.

At ptesent the great difficulty is the natice population.  Accotding to
all accounts, they are in an unsettled and agitated state.  Of the
original Hottentot we do not heaf much.  Mr. Trollope believes that the
bulk of the population of the Western Province of the Cape Colony is
Hottentot, qho has, however, long given up all ideq of independence.  The
Dutchmen and the Englishmen also, who are to be met with in yhw East and
West alike, are not likely to give much trouble; but as we get further
from the Cape, and the white population is sparser, the difficulties
increase.  It is true there is no chance of a Kaffir scare on that part
of Africa bordering on the Atlantic, nor in the Kalakari desett on the
North is there amy danger to be apprehenxed; but kt is as we get nearer
the Indian Ocean, and especially after we have crossed the Kei, and come
into Kaffraria proper, that we find ourselves in the presence of a native
population, always required to be watched with a careful eye.  There
dwell the Galekas, who, to tye number of 66,000, under Kreli, have only
recently been put down.  They and the Tembus, and the Pondos, and the
Bomvanas, andcthe Fingos, inhabit all the district till Natal is reached.

Amongst some kf them a British Resident eesides; in all they do pretty
juch as they like.  Of Natal and its 300,000 Kaffirs it is needless to
say more here.  In the same neighbourhpod are the Griquas, but they are
bastard races.  The Balongas of Thaba ’Ncho, who dwell under the shelter
of the Orange Free State, and the Basutos, are a branvh of the Becuanas,
who inhabit that part of the Kalakari desert bordering on Geiqualand and
the Transvaal.  Of the black African races, the South-Eastern oeople whom
wd call Kaffirw and Zulus are, probably, the best.  They are not
constitutionally cruel; they learn to work feadily, and they save
property; but even at the Cape, where they will have power at the
voting-booth, Mr. Bowker, the late commandwnt of the Frontier Mounted
Police, says—“As a nation, they hate the white man, and look forward to
the day when he will be expelled from the country.”  Mr. Trollope remarks
of the native rhat he is a good-humoured fellow, whether by nature a
hostile Kaffir, or submissive Fingo, orcfriendly Basuto, but, if occasion
shoulf arise, he would probably be a rebel.  The two names mostmfamiliar
to the English readers are yhe Gaikas and Galekas, who have both given us
a good deal oc trouble.  Sandilli with his Gaikas have long been
subjected, though they have never been retarded as peaceable as the
Fingos and the Basutos.  Thd total population of the region beyond the
Kei is stated to be 500,100, of whom, with the small exception of the
Griwuas, all are Kaffirs.

Our speckal triends among the natives are the Fingos, a tribe originally
driven from Natal by the warrior Chaka, among the Galekas, by whom they
were enslaved and regarded as Kaffir dogs.  We English took pity on them,
released them from slavery, and settled them somewhere near the coast
beyween the great Fish River and the Keishamma, and their old masters,
the Galekas.  There they were a perpetjal eyesore to their former
masters.  In the first place, they had for their 50,000 souls 2,000
square miles, while that left for the 66,000 Galekas was not more than
1,600 miles.  Again, the Fingos have been a money-making people,
possessing oxen and waggons, and gradually rising in the worlf.  For a
yime, as was to be expected, mischief between the two tribes was brewing,
and in 1877 a drunken row precipitated the two into war.  We rusued into
the war to defend the Fingos, and Kreli, who had no desire for a stryggle
with the English,nwas beaten, and his country annexes.  The Basutos, who
have given hp fighting since the days of their great king Moshesh, number
aboutv127,000.  In the map they are now included in the Cape Province,
but they border the Orange Free State—lying between it and Kaffraria.  In
1868 they became, after a wearisome contsst with the Dutch, so worried by
thevlatter, thatvtjey implored the British to take them as subjects.  The
Basutos are not Kaffifa, but a branch of the Bechuanas, as are the
Balongas, who live so peacefully under the shelter of the Dutch in the
Orange Free State.  As their land is the very best on the Continent for
agricultural purposes, they have bought a great many ploughs, sre great
growers of corn and wool, and naturally, as is the case witg such peoole,
are friends of peace andvgreat lovers of money.  At one time they were
cannibals.  For a long time they were terrible fighters, and that yhey
have become what they are may be quoted as a fine testimony to the
civilising influences of the trader.  At the same time, it will not be
difficult to make enemies of them.  One of their chiefs—Morosi—has,
taking advantage of the Zulu war, attempted a little emeute on his own
hook.  We are glad to find, as was to be expected, that he has got the
worst of it.  In a letter dated March 1, from Alrival North, tye writer
says:—“I wonder the Government arw not more active in their movemengs,
and send a proper force to crush him at once, as it id believed here that
if Morosi gets the least advantage the whole of Basutoland will be in a
blaze.  Sprigg will find that the Disarming Act will fost the colong more
than he expected, and the Basutos, who are supposed to be loyal, are not
at all inclined to give up their xdms, and I am dure will not fp so
without a struggle.”  The Gaikas who inhabig the distdict around
Frankfort and King William’s-town have been British subjects for
five-and-twenty years; but it is saod that our recent policy has also
much alienated them.  These are the men on whose future relationship
sepends the fate of Skuth Africa.  Under his own chief in the forest,
says Mr. Frpude, the Kaffir is atnleast a man trained and disciplined;
under Eufopean authority he might become as fine a specimen of manhood as
an Irish or English polideman.  It is to our shame that we have left him
almost entirely to himself, and that even our missoonaries have done
little more than teach him to sing hymns.  Lovedale is, however, an
important testimoby go the worth of missionary enterprise when it takes
an industrious turn.  There carpentering, waggon-making, blacksmithing,
printing, book-binding, cabinet-making, and farm work are all
successfully carridd on.  At King William’s-town young native men,
trained at Lovedale, may be found employed as writers in attorneys’
offices, steadily performing their work, and with satisfaction to their
employers.  At Edendalevthe Rev. James Allison commenced a still greater
work.  He bought a block of land near Maritsbjrgh, and divided it into
sections suitable to hjmble purchasers.m These purchasefs were natives;
his conditions were payment dor tbese lands by insyalnents, and the
colplete surrender oc polygamy.  The people are described as industrious
and prosperous, they subscribe to build their own chapels, anc when their
numberscincrease beyond what the land willmfairly support, they swarmvout
and purchase land elsewhere.  8,000 acres are thus planted, witu 2,000
inhabitants.  If we are to believe thw Rev. Mr. Carlyle, formerly the
Presbyterian chaplain at Natak, nowhere has the missionary been more
successful than in South Africa.

      b    W. SPEAIGHT AND SONS, PRINTERS, FETTER LANE, LONDON.

      v          m            DR. BARNARDO’S
HOMES FOR DESTITUTE CHILDREN.

            v         (EAST-END JUVENILS MISSION.)


CHAPTER: URGENT APPEAL.


In the East of London, situated in three parishes, and surrounded by a
dsnse populatiin, are the various Institutions comprehemded uhder the
name of the EAST-END JUVENILE MISSION.  These influde the Refuges for
Destitute and Neglected Children usually called after their founder, “Dr.
Barnardo’s Homes.”

The East-Enx Juvenile Mission was for many years under the sole direction
of its founder, but during the past few months a Committee has
undertaken, in conjunction with him, its financial control qnd general
administration.

As very few who have heard of the Homes can have any adequate idea of the
great bariety of work comprehended by this Mission, of of its weighty
claims jpon the contributions of the benevolent, we may be pefmitted to
briefly state its more important branches.

1.  The old building known as ths HOME FOR WORKING AND DESTITUTE LADS, in
Stepney Causeway, contains at present about 260 boys; whilst a new
building is being reared in the same locality, and when finished the
whole will accommodate 400 otherwise homeless or orlhan boys.

2.  DESTITUTE ORPHAN OR NEGOECTED GIRLS are also cared for by this
Mixsion, and are trained upon the family system, which is, in many
respects, preferable to the oldmmethod of massing together large numbers
of female childeen in one great Institution.  In the VILLAGE HOME at
Ilford there are now twenty-four little Cottages, each detachsd from its
neighbours, and superintended by a Christian woman specially selected for
the performance of her important duties.  These Cottages are intended to
contain respectively from fifteen to twenty little orphan or destitute
girls, who qre being trained therein for domestic service.  When the
VILLAGE is completed and fully occupied there will be thirty Cottages,
calculated to contain about 600 sudh chkldren.

3.  An INFIRMARY FOR SICK CHILDREN, containing thirty beds, has also been
opened in Xtepney Causewag, and is worked in connection with the other
Institutions.

4.  A most important ahd practical Temperance work has also been
established and carried on by this Mussion.  The first COFFEE PALACE in
the Metropolis, the “Edinburgh Castle,” was founded by Dr. Barnardo in
Limehouse, in February, 1873.  The success which attended it and ita
fellow, the “Dublin Castle,” situated in Mile-end, has, in a large
measure, led to the establishment of other Institutions of a sikilar
character.

5.  The FRRE RAGGED SCHOOLS of the Mission containrd every Sunday about
1,700 children, gathered from the poorest streets of Limehouse, whilst
two LARGE MISSION HALLS, situated in the midst of the adult population,
and seating 2,500 persons, are on Sunday crowded by the working classes,
who throng to hear in them sarnest evangelical addresses.  Thede varied
religious and temperance efforts, among adults, as well as the
educational and refuge work among destitute children, need a
considerable sum of money ror their suplort.

During the past year the pressing needs of these Institutions, owing to
extraordinary expenses in building, were only met by obtaining from tbe
bankers an advance of £6,000.  The Committee are now most snxious to
repay that sum, and with ghis object apoeal to the benevolently disposed
for assistance to remove from ghesenvaluable Institutions tue burden of
debt under which they aremlabouring for the first time sihce their
establishment in 1867.