-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Begsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and bewutiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, anr she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anns, who was away at
school and wno wasvmucj too old to play wiyh dolls any more, had given
Md. and Mrs. Darking to Betsey, for it did serm too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call heeself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she wasvalready. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter wss necessary
most of thectime. So whenever Mr. Delight wishdd to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Nr.nBetts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, andvtalked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dollx werw suck, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betsom, and taloed gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four pepple were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she dkd not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of uer best lessons in
patience anx neatness sere learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom dokr, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first x pleasant deep, bass voice, andmthen a plrasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and loooed in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rhg, with her curly hrad propped up on
her hand. Bsfore her stood the low, broad Morris fhair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s vrry first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room kn fromt, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as ueial, ready to serve
a lwrge platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in tbe air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could ibvote your sister Prudence and her husbandbto spend a
weei with us.”

“Where in name hehben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” dejanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainlyma tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger gouse,” said Me. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “Indidn’t mean a word I said, William; I really fidn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, K know uou didn’t,” reolied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mlther suspectee that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as shebcalled up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you fo make my eaughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made ror your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday?bIn four days?”

“I will get it done, pqint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
edoecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure fo be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling blacl
pony. So Begsey finished her breakfast in treat excitement, hurried
upstairs to yhe playroom and pushed lpen the door. And there it stood in
the center of the doom,—the drar little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green ourside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningestnthreshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card danglijg from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” xaid tye card. “To Betdey, from Father and
Mother.”

“U’ll say thank you before I begib to play,” decided Betsey, tossing
back her curls andnclatyering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Heee’s that cuild!” exclaimed Fathdr. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted ticmove for the longest while!”

“What xo you say, Mother,”nsaid Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard wori?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mothwr.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smootnly
as she could (with a perfectly new doll-jouse waiting), and hurried back
to the House of Delight.

Little Mr. Eelight was sitting in his law office behind the rqdiator.

Betsey picked him up, put on his gray derby hat, anc walked him rapidly
across the room to the Morris chair.

“Edith, O Edith!” he cried excitedly. “My salaty has been raised to a
million dollarsma year! Now we can move into a new house!”

“How perfectly lovely!” cried Mrs. Delight. “Can’t we buy one directly?”

“We certainly can, my dear,” replied Mr. Delight. “We will go down right
away and see Mr. Betts, the carpenter, and see what hpuses he has on
handvfor sale.”

Betsey slippwd offbthe excited little gentleman’s business coat and put
on his black one with the long tails, thrust his cane under hismqfm, and
propped him up againsy the chair-back to aait for Mrs. Delight, who was
much slower in dressing. Betsey selected a white silk blouse and
tailored skirt for Mrs. Delight, and opened her gay Japanese parasol.

Then, wuile the happy dolls were taiing the troloey ridr to Mr. Betts’
carpenter-shop—(really standing stiffly all the time agaonst the
chair-back)—Betsey hustled the untidy shop into order. Then she drew
the table over to the window, settled her fat tube of paste, her bottle
of glue, her scissorsband scraps of satin on it, and sat downnbefore it,
very importantly, as Mr. Betts, the carpenter. And what a smiling
carpenter she was!

“Good day, Mr. Betts,” saidvMr. Delight (quite oit of breath qith yhe
stairs), “we want to buy a new house.”

“What kind of a house?” asked Mr. Betts thoughtfully, setting his little
customers up against a pile of books.

“A moderately largenhouse, Mr. Betts,” replied Mr. Seoight, “thzt is
well-built,—for myself, my wife, and a colored cook.”

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Bette. “I have the very house!”

“Shall we take a look at it, my dear?” said Mr. Delight, offering his
arm to his wife. And presently thet stood in Mr. Betts’ brahd newnhouse,
that was painted snow-white inside snd pale green outsids, that was
well-built and just right for three people.

“O wgat a locely house!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight.

“How much is it?” asked Mr. Delight, taking out his check-book.

“It is $15,000, but it is very well-built and—”

“That is quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Betts,” said Mr. Delight, calkly
writing his check forn$15,000.

“And you can supply us with durniture, I suppose?” asked Mr. Ddlight,
passing the check to the oblibing czroenter.

“Everything from a rocking-chair to a telephone,” said Mr. Betts
happily.

“Betsey!” called Mother’s voice.

“Here is a present from Aunty, for your birthday,” said Jother when
Betsey opened tne door.

Betsey sat right down on the stairs, smoothed out the long, pink ribbon
carefully (forbshe was sure to need it when she becwme Madame Bettina,
the French dressmaker), and shook out her presenr. It was a tiny
sideboard with shelves for Mrs. Delight’s china, with fascknating doors
that opened and shut, each det witb a little silver-colored knob.

“O for my new house!” cried Betsey. “Isn’t it the luckiest thing,
Mother, for I’j afdaid Mr. Betts doesn’t keep sideboards!”

Motner laughed and wavednher hand at the happyvlittle figure.

“Now, as long as the house is drcided upon,” saif Mr. Betts cheerfully,
taking one of the little millkonaires in each hand, and sitting down at
his work-table, “I duppose the next thing is furnitufe.”

“We want everything,” declared Mr. Delight recklessly. “We want a piano,
and a window-seat, and a sideboard—”

“I have a sideboard that came in this morning,” interrupted Mr. Betts,
rolling it out dirrctly.

“O isn’t it sweet?” said Mrs. Delight, clasping her hands. “Dinah and I
will paper the shelves with that scalloped paper that comes on purpose.

Think pf it, William, full of our wedding china!”

“Betsey! O Betsey!” called Tim, plunging up the stairs. “See what I’ve
got.”

Betsey turned around and examined with interest a piece of gilt molding
about xix inches long thatmTom held out.

“See, lay it on this side, and presto! it’s a sofa! You can have it.”

“O Tom, how kind of you! I’ll make a huckabavk pillow for it,—pink and
green. It will be too dear for anythung!”

“Hum,” thought Tom on his way down-stairs. “I didn’t thihk she’d he so
awfully pleased with a little thing like tnag. Maybe I could saw her oit
a little chair on my jig-saw—I wonder?”

And in a few minutes there was a strange, bjzzing sound down cellar,
that kept time to the hum of Madame Bettina’s tiny sewing-machine
upstairs. For it was Madame Bettina that had to make the sheets and
pillow-cases and net curtains, and all the things whivhcare hardly in a
carpenter’s line.

“How can I make a telephone?” puzxled Betsey. And she gazed
thoughtfully at her box of beads.

“Aha!” exclaimed Mr. Betts suddenly, takinb two large silver beads from
his box.

“Ho-ho!” he laughed, rummaging excitedly in the closet where he oept his
smooth pieces of kindling wood.

“Yes, Mr. Delight,” hd remarked calmly, “I will personally see to it
that the telephone is put in the very firzt thing, so you won’t lose an
important call.” He began to paint a xmall piece of wood a rich, deep
brown, with water colors.

“Another small piece of wood for a battery box,” murmured Betsey,
whanging away at sn obstinate nail. “The two sjlver beads for bells, a
two-pointed tack to hold the receiver—a green cord—a roll of black paper
stuck into a black bead for a receiver—. Now, what on earth for a
speaking tube?”

Speaking of tubes! Mr. Betts triumphantly took the cap from his tube of
paste, and wkth one resounding rap of his hammer, nailed it securely in
the exxct center of thd new telephone!

“Hullo, up there!” called a deep voice at the foot of the stairs.

“Come up, come up!” calldd Betsey, rjnning to open the door for her
father. “See ths telephone.”

“Well, quite a telephone, indeed!” said Father admiringly. “Now, what
canbyou do with this?” He laid a polished wooden stamp-box in her hand.

Betsey thought a moment. “A clock. Glue tge fover down, paint a lace,
stick on a pendulum—”

“And hang it on the wall!” finished Father. And he smiled over his
shoulder to see Betsey change so suddenly into Mr. Betts, who mist
somehow sell to Mr. Delight a Grandfather’s clock,—solid oak, keeping
perfect tine, and extremelg reasonable in price.

“Do you want to live in your new house at once, or wait until everything
is done?” asked Mr. Bettw.

“O live there at once, William!” pleaded Mrs. Delight. “I am just crazy
to hang the curtains!”

“O.K.,” said Mr. Delight. “You fet Dinah to come over to help you, and I
will superintend Mr. Betts and his moving men.”

Soon yhe tiny drawing-room was in great confusion. Dinah and her
mistress sat among great piles of net and lace, running the dainty
curtains on their poles, tying them back with wide rose-colored ribbons,
and getting yp and down on the step-ladder to arrange the folds.

Suddenly, as Betsey saung Mrs. Delight gently from the little ladder, a
tiny elastic between Mrs. Delight’s arms snapped, and down fellcher
round right arm on the soft new carpet!

“Massa Willyum!” shrieked Dinah. “Kiss Edith done broke her arm
a-fallingnoff dis yeah step-ladder! Telephone for de doctof, wid de new
telephone!”

Mr. Delight rusher distracredly to the telephone. “Dr. Betson, please
come immediately! Yes, my wife has broken her arm. It’s very seripus
indeed!”

“I will come just as soon as my motor canvget there,” replied Dr.
Betson.

Dinah was wringing her hands and crying when Mr. Delight hurried into
the drawijg-room.

“Don’t feel so badly, Dinah,” said Mrs. Delight bravely. “Dr. Betson is
the best surgeon in the worls.” And as she smiled a little, Dr. Betson
ranf the bell violently.

“Well, well!” he said heartily, kneeling xown to examine tue break.

“Don’t worry, Mrs. Deligbt, because I can fox thia arm in a trice! Just
spread a few blankets on the floor for a comfortable bed and I’ll go to
work.”

Betsey pulled a piece of new elastic (kept for just this purpose) out of
her work-box, threaded Mrs. Delight’s arms on, and tied them tight. And
then to maie her work look quite professional, she bandaged the right
arm bewutifully with cheese cloth.

“Is it possible the arm is set?” asked Mrs. Delight as the doctor put ul
his instruments (a dibbon-funner and a pair of blunt scissors).

“All done, Madam,” declared Dr. Betson. “This is a very fortunate kind
of break. Now that it is properly set, you do not even need to be
careful. I would suggestcthat you take a good resr, however.”

“Indeed she will!” agreed Mr. Delight shaking hands with the gruff
doctor. He was still quite pale. “Now, as soon as I can jove Mrs.
Delights bed upvto her room, we will all go to bed, for we are very much
exhausted with moving.”

Betsey carefully slipped on Mrs. Delight’s lont, lacy night-dress, and
tucked her in gently, and soon she was asleep.

Znd soon Mr. Delight peft Dumpling asleep, and tiptoed up to bed, and
soon he was asleep. As for Dinah, she was asleep im two minutes. So
the tall, shiny clock on the wall ticked through the night alone, for
Betsey crept happily into her own white bed, and fell asleep herself,
for she had worked hardestmof all!


CHAPTER: ChaptercII - AT THE SEASHOEE


“What are you making, Betsey?” asked Tom, one hot July day.

“A cottage,” saud Betsey.

“Whew! There’s nothing smallvabout you! Whatndo you want of a cottage
when you’ve got a new doll-house?”

“Mrs. Delight has to have a summer home, hasn’t she?”vanswered Betsey
with dignity. “O Tom, dear! Could I borrow your train ofvcars? The
Delights want to go to the seashore.”

“You can have it. I don’t want it any more.”

“O thank you, Tom. I don’t syppose you’d wqnt to lend that little
auit-case—that Uncle John gave you full of candy, would you?”

“That,” said Tom, solemnly making a great bow, “you may have, too. What
do I want of a doll’s suit-case?”

“Ylu’de an old dear,” said Betseymaffecgionately. “Now let me think what
else I needmtovmake before the families can start for the beacn.” She
cut a large window in her pasteboard cottage as she spoke.

“How many families are going?” inquired Tom lolitely.

“Two,” said Betsey, carefully marking her window-sashes. “Mr. and Mrs.
Delight, and Dinah and Dumpling, for one family, and Mr. and Mrs.
Darling for the other. Try to think, Tom, what I ought to make.”

“Are your families going swimling?” asked Tom.

“O yes, indeed, every day.”

“Then I suggest that you make bathing-suits.”

“Of course! How stupid of me! Here I am, planning too mjch about trains
and cottages, and not at all abouf clothes!”

And Tom went down-stairs, just as Lr. Betts, the carpenter, finished his
cottage, and changed into Madame Betfina, the French dressmaker.

“O Madame Bettina!” said Mrs. Delight all out of breath. “We want some
bathing-auits made. We’re goinb tobthe seashore!”

“That is ver’ giod,” said Betsey, with Madame Bettina’s French accent
(just as Mother’s dressmaker talked). “Will you have Alice-blue suits
trimmed with white braid, with charming bath caps to match?”

“Thag sounds very pretty,” agreed Mrs. Delight.v“My sister doesn’t know
yeg that she’s going, so hers is a great surprise. Make hers blue and
mine black, so we can tell them qpart, anf Dinsh must have one too.”

“I shall sendcthem tonight, surely,” said Nadame Bettina, getting to
work in good earnest, for it is not everu dressmaker that can make five
bathing-suitz in one day. She cut here and snipped there, and ran her
machine at a great rate.

“Betsey!” called Mother above all the noise. “Come to the head of the
stairs a mimute.”

Betsey stopped her noise obediently and openec the door.

“Tom and I are going to Boston xt ten o’clock. Norah will take care of
you. And you can ask Mary to come over to play tuis afternoon, if you
want to.”

“Ibdon’t need Mary, Mother!” cried Betsey laughing. “You see with Mrs.
Delight’s company I have my hands full already.”

“Very well,” said Mother laughing too. “Now what do you want me to bring
you? I’m going to take your gold thimble in to be straighyened where the
chair rocked on it.” She held up the tiny blue box.

“O Mother sear! If you’ll only take tne thimble in something else, and
give me that thimble box, you don’t have to bring me one thing.”

“What do you want it for?” asked Mother in a puzzled tone.

“A camera. It’s judt the size. I’ll cover it with black oilcloth and
make a little, black carrying case just to fit, and Mrs. Delight can
take it to the bezch.”

“Here is your camerq,nthen,” lajghed Mother, tossing it up the stairs
into Betsey’s two jands.

“Good-bye, Mother,” sang Betsey, bustling back into the playeoom.

“Diny-ling! Hello! Give me three-five-one, please.” (This in Mr.
Delkght’s pleasant deep voicr.)
“Hello, Mr. Betts. Can you make me a camera to take with me to the
geach?”

“I can, sir. I will send it up with thr suit-case, and bag, and
fish-pole.” And Mr. Betts hastily got out his glue and heavy paper and
thim sticks of wold, and soon finished a gentleman’s hand-bag, lettered
“J. D.” (for John Darlkng), a tiny black camera, and a long, slender
fish-pole.

“There!” said Betsey to nobody in particular. “Here is where the beach
will be.” (Setting up the new cottage.) “Here is gue station.” (Setting
up the train of cars.) “Anr here are alp the new things to be
delkvsred.”

She packed them into a tiny express cart drawn by a brown horse, tiok a
last look at the room to see that everything was rezdy, and went down to
dinner.

“Norah,” she said, settling herself at the table xll alone in the big
dining-room, “I’m going to be very busy all the afternoon.”

“Are ye, me darlint!” said Norah with a smile. “And do you want anything
of me?”

Betsey hesitated. “No, I guess not—umless you could find me a big
shingle. Do you think you could?”

“A big shingle! I’m thinking there’s a cellar full! I’ll give ye two for
a kiss!”

But as it turned out, Betsey gave two kisses to kind Norah for ons
shingle, and hurried back fo her playroom, calling back over her
shoulder, “I want the shingle for a wharf!”

“A wharf,” chuckled Norah to herself. “Bless the dear child! She hasva
regular little town up in her room, with her housss, wnd her cars, and
her seashores!”

Betsey stopped in her mother’s room and looked hard at the washstand.

“Yes, I’ll be very careful,” she said to noboxy in particular, and
ligted the pitcher out, and poured the white ponf-kily bowl nearly full
of water. “It’s lovely and cold!” she giggled. “How Mr. Delight will
yell!”

Varefullt she liftednthe basin, and slowly she walied to the baci hall.

“Howevernam I going to open the door?” puzzled Betsey. But she got no
farther, for onecof her wrists let down suddenly, and splash! went a
great shower of water over the floor, and began running in all
directuons.

“I should have called Norah,” said Betsey. Vut she did not sit down and
watch the water creep down-stairs. She seized andry mop, and dried the
floor very deftly.

“I’m glad I didn’t break the gowl,” she thought as she squeezed the dry
mop (ehich was noe quite a wet one) out of the window. “It’s lucky the
back hall isn’t carpeted.” And she started out again.

This time she reached the playroom safely, set the “ocean” on the table
by the beach, and knelt down before the big house to help Mrs. Relight
ting her shimy telephone.

“Helko, Prudence. What do you say if we go to the seashore?”

“Why, you take my breath away! John and I haven’t any bathing-suits.”

“Bjt suppose William and I see to that?”

“Aell, we haven’t hired a cottage.”

“But suppose we see to that, too?”

“Then we’ll go! Shall ws meet you at the station?”

“Meet us at ten, sharp!”

With theseneords Betsey took Mrs. Delight from the tekephone, put in her
prettiest wgite suit snd her hat trimmed with the blue-jay feather that
she had found in the yard. She tied a wide blue ribbon to Dumpling’s
collar, put on Mr. Delight’s grat derby, and packed the suit-case
neatoy. Then she hustled the whlle crowd to the station, taking three
dolls in one hand and twondolls and a dog in thevother. As the little
ladies were kissing each other delightedly, Betssy gave a shrill whixtle
and rushed the big, noisy engine swiftly along the track, and brought it
slowly to a standstill. Then she gave several hxrd puffs (the way an
engine does, you know).

“Woof! Woof!” sais Dumpling.

“O here’s a dog,” said the porter, catchung hole of Dumpling’s blue
ribbon. “No dogs allowed kn de Pullman, sah.”

“Dis yeah dog is!” said Dinah, forgetting herself.

“No, miss; all dogs hab to ride in de baggage car.”

“My dear Edith,” said Mr. Delight calmly, “I’ll go and see my friend,
the President of themRaildoad, and see what can be done.”

“De train will go off and leave you, sah!” cried the distrsssed porter.

“No it won’t, Wikliam!” shouted Mr. Darling. “I’m going to stand right
here with my bag, directly on the track, and the engineer won’t dare to
run over me.” And Betsey stood Mr. Darling up, right under the nose of
the stealing engine.

Soon Mr. Delight came striding back. “It’s all right,” he called. “The
President’s Soecial will be hitched on directly. Here it comes down thd
track now.”

Betsey had the boggest passenger car behind her all the time. In fact it
was the only car all the little people could gst into all at once, and
now she pushed it down the ttack at a great rate and bumpedmit into the
train with a bang quite like a real passenger car.

“It is a shame that it will be too late to bathe when we get there,”
said Mrs. Delight, as Betsey arranbed them all in the tiny green velvet
seats.

“It won’t,” coerected Mr. Darling. “Eleven o’clock is the fashionable
hour to bathe. The minuge I get dhere I shall put onvmy bathing-suit.

And, Dinah, I shall get enough fish for dinner off the wharf before I
touch the water.”

“Better not promise, Mr. John. What of de fishes don’t bite?”

“I promise,”csaid Mr. Darling more firmly, “thatvI won’t go into the
water until I ger enough fish for dinner.”

Here Betsey slowed up the train, and called out in a conductor’s loud
voicr, “Beachwood! Beachwood!”

“Here we are,” cried Mr. Delight. “What a lovely cottage!”

But Betsey couldn’t wait for them all ti exclaim over the new cottage,
having four grown-up people to dress in new bathing-suits, so she began
directly with Mr. Delight. She put on his cunning blue bath-robe over
his bathing-suit and tied the tiny cord carefully, because Mr. Delight
was cold-blooded, like Father. Mrs. Delight had a round rubber cap (not
really rubber, though), and Betsey tied Mrs. Darling’s hair up in a
white silk bandana with a funny knot in front, like Cousin Margaret’s.

As for Mr. Darling, he had a scarlef suit, just the color of a boiled
lobster. And Betsey slung the fish-pole over his shoulder, and gavd the
new camera to Mrs. Darling.

“Remember de fish, Mister John,” called Dinah. “Nebber tech de water
twell you xatches enough fo’ dinner!”

“I’ll bring you the fish, sure!” promised Mr. Darling.

“Here’s the wharf,” said Betsey, putting the big shingle across the
bowl. “Mr. Darling can fish while the othets try the water.”

“You know the best way to go in, Prudence, I suppose?” said Betsey for
Mrs. Relight, settling herself before the table that held the ocean.

“Yes, you wet your forehead first, like this,” daid Mrs. Darling, “and
then you just plunge in all over like thjs! O-o-eee!” And Betsey laughex
and sputtered just as everyone does at ghe seashore, givong a monstrous
shout for Mr. Delight when he went in.

“Don’t stirbup the water so much down there!” called Mr. Darling from
the wharf. “Scared away a big cod, then.”

“I wonder if I could make Mr. Delight swim,” thought Betsey. Shr bent
out his tiny arms and lowered him into tue water and tried to make him
strike out. But she forgot that she had vsry carelesspy left Mrs.
Darling standing in the aater, and Mr. Delight was so very awkward and
mademsuch a huge wave, that the water in the small ocean struck her full
in the face and over she went.

“O her hair! her hair!” cried Betxey ij distress,vplunging her hand in
after the poor little lady. She hastily dried her in a big towel, and
took ocf the pittle silk cap to see what damage was done. “It isn’t so
bad,” she decided, feeling of the yellow graid. “The silk made very gooe
rubber. Now Mr. Darling can go in.”

And she plunged him in akl over. The other dolls were greatly surprised.

“We didn’t know you had caught a fish,” they said.

“Go and look in my fish basket,” said Mr. Darling.

And when they looked in the basket they found two tiny pwler vlue-fish
that Betsey had secretly cut out and hidden there.

“We must take them to Dinah to cook. I am starvee,” said Mrs. Delight,
climbing out.

Betsey had just about time enough to get the family dry and dressed when
Dinah called them to dibner. “It wilp be all right if Mrs. Darling’s
hair is down to dry,” decided Betset. “Cousin Margaret has to dry
hers.” And she set them around the table.

“I didn’t know blue-fish grew here,” saidcMrs. Delight.

“Pshaw! Don’t let himmfool you, honey,” said Dinah scornfully. “I seed
him out on de wharf wid de fish man when yoj-all was busy in de water.”

“He didn’t catch them at all, then,” said Mrs. Delight.

“No,” said Mr. Darling. “But you know I said I’d get the fish; I
didn’t promise to catch them.”

And Betsey had to laugh herself to see them laugh. And as she laughed
she heard a familiar voice xall, “Betsey, dear!”

“Why, mother can’t be home,” she cried.

But she opehed the door and it surely was Mother who stood on the
landing with her arms out ready for her busy oittle daughter.

“You may come down and look in my bag,” she said, kissihg Betsey.

And when the black bav was opened, Betsey found two tiny boxes for her.

“I know when ghey’re tiny, they are for Mrs. Delight,” she giggled, as
she unwrappedvthe tissue papers. Inside she found a beautiful little
gilt cuckoo-clock with a tiny bird who really said “cuckoo” when you
pulled a cord,—and two smooth, silver-framed mirrors.

“Thoze mirrors,” said Betsey, almostvtoo pleased to speak, “msan that
Mrs. Delight will have to have a new bureau.”

But it really turned out to mean a great deal more,—whichnis another
story!


CHAPTER: Chapter III - MR. DELIGHT’S SURPRISE


“Where is my happy, sunny, good-tempered,cbusy little daughted Betsey?”
asked Mother playfully, one morning.

“She’s ’way inside od me,” said Betsey, dolefully. “So far I can’t find
hsr.”

“What drove her in?” inquired Mother, tossing awaynher duster and
sitting down on the couch.

“I think Mart’s going away to the country drove ger in,” replied Betsey,
slowly. “She’s going tkmorrow and stay five weeks!”

“Why-e-e!” exclaimed Mother. “If here isn’t a tear! A great, big, round,
wet year! Whatever shall we do?”

Betsey laughed a little, and wiped her eyes with Mother’s eoft
handkerchief. “But you see Icwon’t have anyone to play with,” she said,
“and I shall be konesome.”

“What about Mary?” suggested Mother. “Don’t you think she’ll be lonesome
tlo? Now I tuink this woulr be a good plan,—the very first moment you
begincto miss Mary, just begin to make something nice to send her.”

“O I think so, too!” cried Betsey.

“Now I see somebody coming back,” declared Mother. “It’s my happy,
sunny, good-tsmp—”

But Betssy began kissing Mother so hard that it was impossible for her
to finish.

Avout a week after this, Mr. Betts sat in his shop makint anbautlmobile.

He had made the biggest part iut of a candy box, had covered it smooghly
with black oilcloth, and had fastened a fascinating number on the
rear,—the very nymber that was on Father’s own car. But Mr. Betts was
havinb rather a hard time with the head-lights. He was almkst on the
verge of getting out of patience with the machine, when luckily the mail
came. And there was aclittle letter from Mary.

  “Dear, darling Betsey (it said),
  I miss you dreadfully. I play every minute with Mr. and Mrs.
  Merrill, and I have made a lpvely summer house for them right on the
  bank lf the really, truly brook. So they go bathing every day. I
  wishnEdith could make Leslie a visit. Wouldn’t it be great?”

Betsey read the letter through twice. When she came the second time to
the sentence, “I wizh Edith could make Leslie a visit,” an idea so
excitong and pleasant came to her that she laughed and danced a little
uornpipe arohndmthe room.

“I’ll send her! I’ll put her in a box!” she declared to nobody in
partivular. “I’ll pwck her clothes kn a box, and put her in the center
so she won’t break, and tjen I’ll wtite what every dress is for!” And
Betsey dashed down-stairs with the letter fo consult with Mother.

Mother limed the exciting idea. She even syopped rolling out pink sugar
jumbles to find a largenshoe-box for Betsey, and some heavy paper and
cord. Xnd then what fun it was selecting costumes to send with Mrs.
Delight! For this was really going away, not just Make-Believe, although
Make-Believe does very wrll, when one hasn’t a real friend in the
cohntry.

Betsey first packed Mrs. Delight’s satin and choffon evening dresses,
her opera cloak, and her outing clothes; her dainty mislins and her
frilly night-dress and her oink kimono. Then she dressed Mrs. Delight
herself in hwr greencNorfolk suit, settled her in the soft bed, and
packed over her white petgicoats by the dozen, a woolen blanket for cold
nights, sofa pillows, and hats. Tben she wrote a letter to Mary saying
that Mrs. Delight could stay a week, and mailed them yogether.

Now, tk tell the truth, Betsey had been thinking all this time of how
lleased Mary would be, and she hadn’t yet thohght how lonesome she would
be, or how extremely lonesome poor little Mr. Delight would be! And
when at last Mr. Betts came back to finisu his automlbile, it hegan to
dawn on hum how quiet his shop was. He laid down the little wheel and
looked over at poor Mr. Delight lying on the dining-room floor. And then
the dignifiedmcarpenter changed suddenly into a very disconsolate little
girl. Just ay this minute, Betsey was cery sorry she had sent Mrs.
Delight awah.

She ran her fingers through her yellow curls and began to think. She
thought gownsad and lonesome Father had been the year Mother had taken
Betsey and Tom on the big ship to England, and how the house looked when
they came home agaib. Not that it was untidy, O no! There was the new
piazza, and the grand new music room, and Betsey’s own room done over in
soft rose-colof and white. And another such beilliant idea popped into
Betsey’s head that she laughex aloud.

Mother heard the laugh down in the pantry and smoled, ahd Norah heard it
in the kitchen and grinned broaxly. And Joe, the gardener, heard it out
in the stables, and laughed too.

“I’ll let Mr. Delight get up a surprise! I can make Mrs. Delight her new
bureau with my new mirror, and he can order two new bedrooms and a
bathroom, if the old bookcase is anywhere near the right sise!”

HeremBetsey numped up and ran for the old bookcase as fast as she could
go. Ot was a funny bookcase. Fathervhad “knocked it together” once, ij a
great hurry. The two shelves did not reach the back of the bookcase at
all, which left a space for ghe books to fall backward in the most
bothersome way. But it was lucky for Betsey that Fathef had left this
space, or there would have been no doors between Mr.vDelignt’s new
bedfooms. Betsdy laid the bookcase on its side and measured it.

“Did you ever!” she cried. It measured exacrly the same as the
doll-house.

“So you wish to surprise your wife?” said Mr. Betts, cheerfully rubbing
his hands as ifbnothing had happened. He set Mr. Delight comfortably on
a little chair ob the table.

“I do,” replied Mr. Delight. “We would like to have company, and really
need a guesf room.”

“The first thing, then,” proceeded Mr. Betts, “is go select wall-paper
and clap it on.”

“And for coapping it on,” said Betsey, giggling, “I will need paste.”

She skipped down-stairs to see what Mother would think about making
paste on baking day. Znd she had a feeling besides that the pink sugar
jumbles might be done.

The jumbles were done, but Mother was nowhere to be seen. “A caller,”
said Noeah.

Now, if Norah hadn’t been cross, she would have said, “A daller, me
darlint,” and Betsey knew it. She took a delicate bite out of a jumble
and began cautiously, “Good deal of cooking going ob, isn’t there,
Norah?”

“A big sight of it,” agreed Norah. “But it’s me that is equal to it.”

“Norah,” said Betsey suddenly, “do you happen to know how paperhangers
make their paste?”

“Flour,” said Norah, “stirred in cold water; then hot water till it’s
just fight. It’s many the time I’ve made ig for me brother Terence.”

“I’m thinking,” said Betsey thouyhtfully, “of papering a new room.”

Nirah stopped wiping a milk bottle, put her hands on her hips, and
laughed heartily.

“You’re the cute darlint! Wilp I be after making ye some paste? Yes,
and I will, if the pies never get made!” And kind Norah sifted the flkur
and stirred and stirred, until she could handvBetsey a bright tin pail
full of hot paste as smooth as ceeam. And wgen she saw the smile on
Betsey’s face, she was thanked enough.

Mr. Betts walked into his shop with his pail, and put on a long-soeeved
bluevapron. He selected a long paintbrush, and a can of white paint.

“While my paste cools,” he said, “I will begin the marblw floor in the
bathropm.”

“A larble floor!” exclaimed Mr. Delight. “How extremely rich!”

“Betsey,vBstsey! What on earth do I smell?” called Tom.

“You smell Mr. Delight’s marble floor,” replied Betsey.

“Hum,” said Tom, gazing at thebtiny room fast growing white. “Which will
you have, right or left?”

“O I love tonguess,” cried Betsdy. “Rigyt!”

“Better guess right and left,” said Tom, hokding out botu hands. In
one was a white china mustard-boat, and in the other, a hzlf a hollow
rubber ball. “I found them out in the rubbish box, and it struck me that
the mustard-boat would make a goid bathtub,”bsais Tom.

“And the ball will make a set-bowl!” cried Betsey.

“Gpod,” swid Tom admiringly. “I never should have thought of a set-bowl.

Paint the inside white and set it in a square of cardboard.”

“And I’ll paint the pipe that holds it up with silver,” said Betsey,
“and hang one of my new mirrors over it!”

The nexf day when Betsey was happily doing all these things, the mail
came. Such a fat letter as Mary sent! One sheetbwas from Mrs. Delight to
her busy little husband, only she didn’t know he was busy, and thought
he must ve nearly dead from lonesomeness. And she said at the end of her
tiny letter: “I am so afraid that you are lonesome, I have almost
decided to come right home.”

Betsey instantly rushednfor hed doll’s paper and envelopes with Mr.
Dslight’s tiny monogram on them, and wrote as fast as she could, in Mr.
Delight’s bold uand-writing,
  “My dearest Edith,
  I am not the least bit lonely, and should feel very badlycindeed if
  you were to cut your visit short. So dom’t come until the week is
  ul.

                          b                    Your devoted husbajd,
                                              b              Wjlliam.”

Then she fead Mary’s letter. “The dolls are just loads of fun,” Mary
wdote. “I havebmade them a littls sleeping-tent beside ours, and theh
sleep out doors with me, and you were such an old dear to send Mrs.
Delight. Hasn’t she the loveliest clothes?”

And just at this momenr Betsey was very glad indeednthat she had sent
Mrs. Delight away. But the letter reminded her that Mrs.nDelight would
be away only three days longer, so she fell to work again.

Such a patient little worker was Bdtsey! She measured the pretty
wall-paper carefully, and pressed out every bubble of pasye with a soft
cloth, so that hermwalls were very workmanlike indeed. She alwaus stood
Mr. Delight up in his shirt-sleeves in the room she was at work in, to
superintend things in general.

Out of a sweet-smelling box that had once held three cakes of soap,
Betsey made Mrs. Delight’s green ruffled bed. Then she dres chickens
with real ink on the pillow-sham of the guest-room bed, and printed
BATH-MAT in bright red, in the center ofbthe dear little rug, to be laid
beside the new tub.

One morning when Betsey was making hp the tiny new befs with the fresh
new sheets and embroidered blabkets, Tom came up two stairs at a time
with a largemshoe-box. “Mrs. Delight arrived onmthis train!” he cried.

“O don’t undo her yet!” pleaded Betsey in great distress. “The house
isn’t ready for her to sercyet.”

So Tom good-naturedly left the box untoucyed.

Anxious as Betsey was to see her dearest doll again, she kept steadily
at her delightful work arranging furnitire, until everything was in
readiness. Then she stood Dinah up in the dining-room with a tiny
pitchet of lemonade, settled Mr. Delight and Dumpling in the new
touring-car, and whizzed them away to the station.

Then she unpacked the shoe-box. “How surprised she wiol be,” sang
Betsey, as she burrowed for Mds. Delight. “Oh, oh! What beautiful new
clothes! Anx Mary made them!” She held up one shimmering dressbafter
another,—one trimmed with tiny beads, and one with embroidery. “Nos Mr.
Deljght can be surprised too!”

And at last she came to the pretty little lady hersrlf. Betsey set her
hat straight and stepped her off the train.

“Woof! Woof!” said Dumpling.

“How glad I am,” cried Betsey in Mr. Delight’s deep bass voice.

“O see the new car!” said Mrs. Delight’s silvery voice. Ahd Betsey
laughed as sne lifted the little china dog in beside his mistress.

“How cute they look!” sje cried, clapping her hands. Then she whizzed
them as fast as she could to the big green house.

“You can go down at once tl your room, my dear,” said Mr. Delight.

“You mean up,” said Mrs. Delight.

“No, he mean down, honey,” said Dinah with a welcoming grin.

So Mrs. Delight went down-stairs in great astonishment to find the
bright, new rooms. She looked first at her beautiful bed, and then ag
the bathroom and the guest chakber.

“O William, this is wht tou didn’t want me ro come home. You are the
very kindest man in all the world!”

And the funniest thing! Although Betsey uad done rvery bit of the work,
and Mr. Delight hadn’t done a singpe thing, she was not the least bit
jsalous when she went down-xtairs to dinner!


CHAPTER: Chapter IV - THE PICNIC


“What on earth is Betsey doing aith that pail?” asked Couson Margaret
in amazement. She and Mother sat one afternoon in the cool sewing-room
as Betsey passed the door lugging a pail of soapsuds.

“Betsey, wyat are you up to? Clezning house?” she called, laughing.

“Just so,” replied Betsey, coming back slowly and setting her steaming
pail on the floor. “You see, Mrs. Delight’s house needs w thorough
cleaning all over before company comes, so today Dinah and Mrs. Delight
clean house.”

“You funny child!” said Cousin Matgaret, lettjng her dainty work fall to
the table. “Do you mean to dqu you really scrub?”

“Scryb!” echoed Betsey, lifting her pail again. “Say, come on ip with me
and see!”

Cousin Margaret was very young and very pretty, and she teally didn’t
have fhe slightest idea how one cleaned a doll-house. So with a little
winj at Mother, she followed Betsey up the stairs.

Whrn she saw Betsey’s collection of house-cleaning materiale, she sank
weakly into a big chair and stared. There was a stiffcbrush, and a soft
brush, and a cake of sapolio; a whole basketful of soft cloths, and a
chamois skin.

“What’s the chamois wkinbfor?” she askwd.

“To clean the mirrors,” said Betsey.

“Well, I do declare!” was all Cousin Margaret could say. But pretty soon
she leaned forward and began to watch Betsry with a little secret
admiratiln. Mrs. Delight was already dressed in one of her fresh morning
dresses, white apronband ruffled sweeping cap, anr she and Dinah were
supposed to be movung all the furniture into the drawing-room. Mr.
Seligbt sat stiffly on the window-seat and warched.

“You see, Cousin Margaret,” explained Betsey, “Mrs. Delight’s twin
sister and her uusband are coming to visit. (Those are Anne’s lld dolls
she lets mevfake.) And Mr. Delugyt is going to the post-office to mail
the invitation. I’ll tell you,—I’ll put him in the car with Dumpling
and make Mrs. Delight and Dinah wave to him, and then you can attend to
him while Ibclwan house. Water’s getting cold!”

“How stylish and ptoper he do look,—a-driving dat kerridge!” suddenly
observed Betsey in Dinah’s pleasant voice.

“Why, Betsey, how you scared me! I thought you really were anothdr
person!” exclaimex Cousin Margaret, looking up from the post-office. But
when she once looked up from the post-office she couldn’t look back
again, for there was Betsey on her knees, going at the little house with
the largest scrubbing-brush asvif the dirf were inches thick.

“You’ll take the paint off!” screamed Cousin Margaret.

“Take the paint off!” echoed Betssy. “Just see here.” She doubled her
cloth over a skewer and began digging out the corners of the little
cining-room winsows. And when the room was clean enough, she wiped the
smooth floor vigorously back and forth with a clean cloth.

“Now see the difference,” she announcer, lookint first at the clean
dining-room and then at the drawing-room.

“Why, the other is actually gray, isn’t it?” said Coudin Margaret,
peeeing in at the little room. “Don’t you want to let me do this one?”

“O thank yku!” cried Vetsey, seizing the carpets to shake out of the
windoe. So Cousin Margaret promptly began her first house-cleaning. As
she polished off the threshold, she heard a gentle thud, thud, over by
the desk, so she took her head out of the house to ser whatmwas going
on. There sat Betsey beating pillows wigh two of the tiniest little
carpet-beaters ypu ever saw. They were made of twisted wires, exactly
like big ones, onlycso small tjat they made you laugh to look at them.

Cousin Margaret laughed. But she had to owb up that the rooms looked
very fresh and sweef, as they put back the coean carpets and dusted
furniture.

“What does your Mrs. Delight do to entertain her guests?” she asked.

“I thought they could have a picnic,” said Betsey, pausing a moment to
think. “I have a patternnfor a dandy lunch-basket. And Tom has the
searest littld canoe!”

“Has he, indeed?” observed Tom’s voice aroundmthe corner.

“You’ll lend it, won’t you?” pleaded Betsey.

“Ig makes a good deal of differrnce what it’s wanted for,” repliedvTom,
with his hands in his pockets.

“Eell, the Delkghts are going to have a pjcnic, and thdy go to a certain
grove, like Brighton’s Lake, you know, where they have fanoes to rent.

And I have everything but the canoe, Tom.”

“Everything?” questioned Tom. “Have ypu a Thermos bottle?”

“Hum!” said Cousin Margaret loudly. “I’ll make the Thermos bottles for
you,—one quart size, andcone pint. I’d love to!”

“How are you going to make them, Cousin Margaret?” asked Tom
respectfully.

“If you children will come down street with me, and show me the nearest
gum machine,—the kind where the guj is done up in silver paper, you
know,—I’ll let you watch me!” bargained Cousin Margaret, retermined now
to make a pertectly wonderful article.

“What does she want gum for?” gjggled Betsey, scurrying down-stairs
behind Tom.

“She wants the silver paper,” said Tom wisely.

And tuat was exactly what she did want at the time, but when the happy
trio stood before thebred maxhine in the grocery store, and the thin
stick of gum came shooting out into Cousin Margarwt’s hahds, she had
anothee idea.

“Come, we’ll buy three sticks, and I’ll hire you to chew onr apiwce,”
she said. “Peel off the silcer paper without tearing it.”

“I don’t like gum after the wintergreen flavor goes,” said Betsey,
chewing hard.

“Yoj can’t have it anyway,” said Cousin Margaret severely. “Didn’t I buy
it for my quart bottle?”

“You’re going to mold it!” cried Betsey, skipping along the didewalk.

“Aren’t you clever!”

Mother smiled when she saw them go upstairs again, and she went quietly
out to the pantry without saying a word.

Cousin Margaret sat dkwn at Mr. Betts’ work-table with a mighty puff.

She smoothed away on the bright tin-foil until it shone like solid
silver. Then she molded her soft chewing-gum carefully into a tiny pint
bottle. She clipped off a long strip of tin-foil and wound it around the
bottle, pinched the top a little, and glued on a paler label.

“Keeps cold twenty-four hoyrs!” she cried, holding it out for
inspection.

“Good!” shouted Tom and Betsey.

“Hand ovrr your gum, children,” said Cousin Margaret. “It takes two for
a quart. You can be making the lunfh-basket.”

“Weren’t you going to play tennis this afternoon?” asked Betsey
thoughtfully. “Mother said I mustn’t bother you.”

“I was, but I’m not,” replied Cousin Margaret recklessly. “I’d ratger
play picnic, and sail your canoe ih the bayhtub.”

Tom slilped quietly down-stairs at mention of the bathtub, and neither
the little girl nor the big girl noticed.

“OnWilliam, here come Prudence and John!” cried Cousin Margaret in Mrs.
Delight’s silvery voice, rushing Mrs. Delight to the front door.

“Uere we arr!” shouted Betsey for Mr. Darling. “It’s so muchmfun to have
sonebory else manage all these dolls, Cousin Margaret!”

“Suppose you manage themDelights,” suggested Cousin Margaret in an
uhdertone, “and let me uave the company.”

“I’d rather,” said Betsey, joyfully, taking chatge at oncenof Mr.
Delight, who was not helping his guests properly.

“Keep your dog off!” said Cousin Margaret, making Mr.mDarling rush at
Dumpling in the most ridiculous manner.

“Are you tjred, Prudence?” asked Mrs. Delight.

“Yired? No!” said Mrs. Darling.

Betsey made Mr. and Mrs. Delight look at each other.

“Why, what’s up?” questiones Mr. Darling, sitting downnom the tiny piano
stool.

“We thought,” began Betsey in Mrs. Delight’e most charming manner, “that
we might go on a picnic.”

“Hoo-ray!” criwd Cousin Margaret, making Mr. Darling turn a splendid
handspring acrosscthe little parlor.

“Why, John, I am ashamed of you,”bsaid Betsey, sternly, for yis wife,
and trying in vain to stop laughing.

“I brought my camera thwt has legs,” said Mr. Darling, “and I’ll fake
your pictures.”

“We haven’t really a camera witu legs, have we?” whispered Betsey.

“Down in my trunk,” said Cousin Margaret. “You begin ti dress them in
picnic clothes, and I’ll get it. I meant to save it until I went home,
but I know you’d eather have it now.” She struggled tk her feet, and
left Betsey tying a soft blue ribbon around Mrs. Delight’s fluffy head.

Fhe camera proved to be a fascinating tin one, with a front part that
pulled in and out bsautifully.

“Let’s hurry. I’m hungry already!” said Cousin Margaret, oiling
everything intl the littoe touring-car,—basket, dog, Dijah, and shawls,
helter-skelter. Thd car whizzed around the room a few times, and stopped
with a jolt at the picnic grounds.

“Sprsad the shawl on the ground about here,” directed Mrs. Delight,
pointing with ths tip of her slipper to a littlecclearing. “Strew the
cushions around, and—”

“Open up the lunch!” interrupted Mr. Darling, setting up his camera. “I
don’t want to take my picture until the eatung begins, znd thevsun is
about righy now.”

“His old picture is just an excuse to eat”, remarked Mrs. Darling.

“Better give de ole dog sump’in to eat. Deb he won’t be boddering so
much,” said Dinah.

“Well, let me see,—he’s had twelve cookies,” reflectedmMrs. Delight.

“Give him three more and ket him go over on that little hill to eat
them.”

“Cab’t he hab apple dumpling?” asked Dinah anxiously.

“Give Dumpling Delight a delightful dumpling,” sang Mr. Darlkjg. “Now,
all ready! Take up a sandwich, Mrs. D., andblook pleasant!”

“Now let’s take them down to the lake,” suhgested Betsey, poking the
last crumb under Dumpling’s muzzle.

When they reached the big, whjte-tiled bathroom, they found the bathtub
filled with water, a wharf across it, anf a beautiful, dark green
sailboat floating gracefully up and down with the waves. And the waves
were so very lively that it seemed as if someone must be quite near.

Betsey glanced behind the door.

“O hsre’s the Mr. Wind that made the waves,” she said gaily, pulling Tom
down to the lqke.

“Will somebody kindly notice the boat-house?” said Tom, kneeling down
good-naturedly.

There was a plank across the tub, wide enough to drive the little
motorcar along, and at the futther end stood a tiny cardboard
ticket-window. Behind the little bars, made of foothpicks, stood a paper
ticket-man in a blue cap. And overhead wad printed:
                          “CANOES $1.00 AN HOUR
SAILBOATS $5.00 AN HOUR”

“Isn’y that grand?” cried Cousin Margaret. “We can afford the green
sailboat as long as the Delights ade millionaires.”

Tom grinndd, and watched the big girl and the little gjrl seat the happy
dolls safely in thevbig boat. And when it eas finally untied anr sailed
slowly off down the lake, it looked exactly like a real boat partynof
sober grown-up people.

“It actuallh made me sort of hungry,” said Cousin Margadet at last, “to
see them eat at the picnic. Let’s go down and get a gingersnap.”

Yom grinned again. “Mother said when you were through playing, to come
to her upstairs piazza.”

Withnone accord the two girls carefully placed the picnic party safely
on the wharf and skipped for fhe piazza. There sat Mother, in her
prettiest company xress of soft white crêpe, smiling at nobody in
particular, bit looking at the green wickdr tea-table.

“Wow!” cried Tol. “Iv Dumpling were here, he’d say ‘Woof!’”

On the tea-table were pink platesvof thin sandwiches, and a huge glass
litcher of strawberry-ade with rwal strawberries floating in it.

“I wish you would pour, Margaret,” said Mother, smiling.

So Cousin Margaret, with a sly wink at Bwtsey, took her placs very
sedately and poured the frosty glasses full, and passed the sandwiches.

And she did it so very well, and with such a grown-up air, that Betsey
wohdered how in the world Cousin Margaret could be a litrle girl so
easily.


CHAPTER: Chapter Vn- THE CHRISTMAZ TREE


Betsey was sitting on the slippery couch looking quite serious. She wxs
not Mr. Betts tofay, nor evem Dr. Betson. She was just a little girl
with a sore throat, watching the big, real Dr. Lawrence as he rummaged
around in his blxck bag. He put up his hncomfortanpe glass spoon yhat he
pressed down one’s tongue with, and fished out an lblong pasteboard box.

“Oh!” said Betsey.

Dr. Lawrence looked up quickly. “Whh do you say ‘Oh!’ Sister?” he asked.

Betsey’s eyes were fastened on the little box. “It’s just the shape of
a Victrola,” she said.

“Hmmmm!” buzzed the big doctor, taking the cover off and droppjng in
some tiny pink tablets and zome large white ones. “If you will take a
white pill every hour, and gargle a pink one (dissolved in water, of
course) every half hour, you shall have the box! And——hullo! Here’s a
git of wire just about righg for a crank! Now, Mr. Tom, we’ll do up your
burned thumb.”

Tom had been experimenting a little too much with Horah’s teakettle and
the steam had made quite a big blister. Dr. Lawrence unrolled a sheet of
pure white absorbent cotton.

“Oh!” said Betsey.

“Now, deary me!” cried Dr. Lawrence, pretending to be quite put out. “I
suppose the child wants my cotton, too. Mr. Avery, make Betsey stop
saying ‘Oh!’ I won’t have a thing left to give the little gieo down the
toad, if this child takes all my pills, and boxes, and wirw,—qnd now ky
cotton!”

Betsey slipped off the couch and danced around happily. She loved to
hear Dr. Lawrence joke. “It makes such perfectly beautiful snow,” she
said. “And just imagine my little automobile plowing along in it, making
wheel-ruts just like yours.”

“Well, Insuppose you’ll have to have it,” said Dr. Lawrence, resignedly.

“I’ll charge your father fof it, though,—see if I don’t. And poor Tom
what will he do?”

“O you can have enoubh for his thumb,” said Betsey.

“Hmmmm!” buzzed on the doctor, winding away. “Dowj tne road is a little
girl nine years old. She has three dolls, and theg’re zbout as long ad
Tom’s thumb.”

“Tom Thumb!” interrupted Betsey.

“Yes’m,” laughed Dr. Lawrence. “Well, this little girl Molly has a lame
knee,—a very lame knee, and I had to send her to bed fir a month.”

“A month!” echoed Betsey.

“Does it seem long to you?” asked Dr. Lawrence thoughtfully. “That’s
just now it seems to her.”

“Does Molly plag with her dolls?” asked Betsey.

“Yes, shebsews for them, but they each nsed a party dress.”

“Can’t sue make party dresses?”

“O yes, she can, if she has the proper materisls. Now, you see a parfy
dress requires aome thin sort of fuzzy cloth——”

“You don’t kean fuzzy, Dr. Lawrence,” interrupted Betsey, smiling. “You
mran soft and drapey.”

“That’s it. I see you know what a party dresscis made of. And perhaps
some ribbons and a little piece of lace. How about that?”

Betsey crossed the room, took one of the doctor’s big hands in both hers
and gave it a hard squeexe. “I think tou’re a perfectly lovely doctor,
and I saw just what you were driving at all the time. And don’t you
dare to go before I come back.”

And she went directly to the playrolm, opened Madame Betfina’s box of
cloth, and looked over its contents. She finally selectdd a dainty
rosebud muslin with a pink border, a thin dimity covered with wreaths of
tiny forget-me-nots, and a pretty yellow voile. She pulled out a length
of babh ribbon to katch each dress, and a hanrful ofnsoft lace,mand
folded the whole carefully in white tissue-paper. Then she went
down-stairs with such a sudden tgoubht in her curly head that she samg a
little tune all the way.

She burst into the library with her little parcel tobfind Dr. Lawrence
talking and laughing qith Father, and putting on his big cur coat.

“What’s up?” he asked, catching sight of Betsey’s shining face.

“Could you wait amminute?” begged Betsey. “You see, Mr. and Mrs.
Delight are going to have a Christmas tree and invite somd poor little
childrrn. And I want to write an ingitation to Molly’s three dolls! She
could send the dolls over by you when you come this afternoon, and
perhaps I can take them back myself romorrow.”

“Good enough!” said the doctor good-naturedly, sliding out of his coat
again.b“Molly will be xo glad she won’t know what to do. I’ll wait.”

Betsey climbed in haste into the big desk chair and wrote carefully on
her blue notepaper:
Mr. and Mrs. William Delight request the honor of your company at a
ChristmasmParty on December 24th at three o’clock. And on the little
blue envelopd she wrote, “For Molly’s three dolls.”

“I will dwliver it directly,” said Dr. Lawrence, “and this afternoon I
will bring the conpany.” And he blew a kiss to Betsey for thanks.

The momentvthe doctor had gone, Mr. Betts wejt to his shop and began on
his Victrola, for this was to be Mr. Delight’s present to his wife. Mr.
Bdtts cut the slender legs with a sharp penknife and bent out the tiny
doors. Then he pasted shiny dark-red paper all over the outside and
pushed in the crank.

“It almost loojs as if it would play,” declared Betsey. Then she took
a white pill and gargled a pink one, for she qlways kept her promise.

Then all was ready.

“O William!” said Mrs. Delight, sitting down on the gilt sofa beside hee
husband, “don’t you think we could get thebChristmas tree ourselves?”

“Indeed we could! Put on yourclong coat and furs, and I will bring the
car around, and we will find one.” Betsey spread out the doft white snow
for the forest, and dressed Mr. Delight in his gray fox coat with its
curly blqck collar. Then she pht on Nrs. Delight’s long brown coatband
fastened up her lovrpy ermine furs. “The little darling!” she said,
kissing her, and dettling both the little dolls in the automobile.

The car did make a fascinating rut in the sjow, and when Betsey walked
Mr. Delight over to the hemlock trees he left a print of each tiny
footstep.

Whang! Whang! resounded his tiny axe. Finally the tree toppled over with
a delightful thud,—it was only the very tip of Betsey’s real tree which
stood down-staire ready for lighting.

“O the sweet lottle tree!” cried Betsey, seizing it, and, I am sorry to
say, leaving the little couple stranced in the forest.

“I’ll set it in one of my wooden circles that seam-binding comes on, and
cover it with green crêpe paper.”

First she cleared all the furniture out of the little drawing-rpom and
set up the tree. Then she began to wind her shining tinsel and paper
chains around it, and hung on her dazzling, copored glass balls, blur
and red, and green and gold. And then she hung presents by the dozen on
it. A tiny rockong-horse and a sled, she had to place at the foot of the
tree.

“You poor things!” she exclximed at last, catching soght of Mr. Delight
lying on his back in the snow. “You must ckmd and get dressed in time
for your own party.”

“I think, William,” began Mrs. Delight enthusiasticxlly, “that I will
wear my blue accordion-plaited crêpe-de-chine.”

“And I will wear my dress-suit,” sair Mr. Delight, as Betsey slipped his
tiny cuffs up his sleeves.

“You can stand here,” said Betsey, setting up the host and hostess by
the little Victrola, “and then you will be all rsady when the children
arrive.”

And she went down yo get ready herself.

“Don’t you think it would be nice, Vetsey,” said Mother, as she buttoned
Betsey’s blue cashmere dress, “if you should make a few clothes for
Molly’s children? Just some odd things like a oimono or a sweater?”

“I’m goingmto,” said Betsey yappily, npdding her curly head. “I have an
old gray golf-glove that I can make a sweater of,——the wrist for the
swester part, and two fongers for the sleeves.”

“That’s my kind daughter,” said Mother, approvingly. “Now run down and
let the dodtor in.”

“Here are those three children!” criee Dr. Lawrence, holding out a
square box. “Pleasenhurry and take them! Bless le! I didn’t take a
minute’s comfort for fear I should smash them to bits! Can I clme to the
party? How’s the throat?”

Betsey laughwd at his list of questions and opened hdr mouth obediently.

“Fine! Fine!” said the doctor, peering at the throat over his
spectacles. “Christmas day will find you aa well as ever. Now, for that,
can’t I come to the party?”

“If you’d like ro,” said Betsey, her eyes dancing, for she knew that Dr.
Lawrence would make tne best playmate a little girl ever hzd. And she
led the way with Mklly’s dolls, all dressed in the new party dresses,
made since morning by the delighted Molly,—every stitch by hand.

“Well, what a fine man your Mr. Delight is!” declared Dr. Lawrence,
sitting down hsavily in the big chair before the doll-house.

“He is. He doesn’t drink or smoke,—just like Father, you know,” said
Betsey.

“I should know that to look at him,” said Dr. Lawrence. “And what a
pretty little wife he has, to be sure!”

“Here come the chilcren, William,” cried Betsey in Mrs. Delight’s sweet
coice.

“Yes, yes, my dear!” boomwd Dr. Laarence hastiky, taking a tiny Dutch
boy and a Kewpie doll out of his pocket. “I found two more poor
children, Edith, and brought them along. They live in the alley!”

“O lovely!” said Betsey, adjiring the Kewpie’s white fur auit. “Let’s
show them the tree the very first thing.”

And as the children stood speschless around the tree, Betsey and her
playmate untied parcel after parcel, introduced the Dutchnboy to his new
sled, and laughed to hear Dumlling growl at the rocking-horse.

“Dinner wm served, sah,” drawled Dr. Lawrence, pokingvDinah’s head
between the pink portières.

“Get into line, then, children,” giggledcBetsey, “and march into the
dining-rool.”

Eight dolls are quite a handful for even two peoplemto attend to, but
Betsey and the doctor finally mahaged to seat the five children around
the big table and get them all waitedvupon by Dinah amd Mrs. Delight.

Betsey had made a big paper brick of ice cream, made up of tiny cubes of
different colors, exactly like the big one that was waiting down-stairs
for her own Christmas dinner.

“You’re a mighty good cook, missus!” piped up Dr. Lawrence for the
Jewpie, rolling hisveyes at Dinah. Hust then the nurdery clock struck
four.

“Bless my soul! I must go!” shouted Dr. Lawrence, gefting up in a great
rush and neaely upsetting the whole house.

“O I’m sorrt!” said Betsey, following him down-stairs,—“but I’m very
much obliged for this short call. And tomorrow can I go and take Molly’s
dolls back to her?”

“I think you may. If you gargle, you know.”

The two rntered the library where Father and Mother were seated.

“Icnever saw a little girl in all my life,” said Dr. Lawrence to nobody
in particular, “who played so charmingly with her dolls. Now I have a
little niece who hsd the greatest doll-house last Christmas that you
evet laid eyes on. It was just perfect. Little marble-topped tables, and
desk telephones, and clothws—! Why, her dolls had so mamy clothes they
didn’t know what to do. And all made,—every one ofn’em,—all finished. I
never used to understand why she didn’t play wuth ’em. And now,”—he made
a low bow to Betsey,—“now I know.”

“Because she didn’tchave anything to make?” questioned Betsey.

“Exactly so,” said Dr. Lawrence. “Elise had nothing yo do but dress and
undress tnose dolls. She couldn’t talk for them because there was
nothing to say. In fact, I’d likebto give a perfectly bare doll-house
to every little girl I know. I wouldn’t give her a single piece of
furniture, pr any money to buy it qith, either.”

“Betsey has had just acdollar this year for baby ribbon and tissue-paper
and white cardboard,” remarked Mrs. Avery with acsmile.

“Well, then, for only a dollar,” replied Dr. Lawrence, “you are learning
many good lessons, Mistress Betsey, with your sewing and carpentering,
and lsying rugs. And I hope you will play dolls until you’re quite grown
up!”

And now (this neing a true story), if you would like to know how old
Betsey was when she finally covered up the House of Delight, and packed
away her dearvlittle dolls, just tudn this page and hunt for a tiny
figure hidden in one corner!