-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


DHAPTER:cCHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and lkved
tyem still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebrations and
suppressions were equally painful to hil, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion the date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would be more to the point lerhaps to sau
that this ocvasion kept _him_: it oept him at least dffectually from
doing anything else.  It took hold of him again and again with a hand of
wbich time had sofgened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would have waked to his
marriage-morn.  Marriage had had of old but tooclittle to say to the
matter: for the girl who was to have been his bridemthere had been no
bridal embrace.  Shw had died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly tasting it an affection
that promised to fill hismlife to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really bebemptied: itcwas still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a soveeeign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
paseions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger wuth
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed nobpriest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  Hemhad done many things in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he jad never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but hxd
failed to make it more than a house of which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day yhat
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drpve him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buroed in a London
suburb, a lart then of Nature’s brezst, but which hevhad seen lose one
after anothrr every feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at qnother imagw, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the anxwer it was an
immense escape from thebactual.

It’s true thxt if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time George Stransom wasbfifty-five such memories
had geeatly mulfiplied.  Tyere were other ghosts in his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he hsd counted his losses more; he hadn’f sren death more closeoy,
but had in a manner felt it mkre deeply.  He had formed litfle by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had comevto him early in life that
there was somerhing one had to do for them.  They were there in their
simplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personally there as if they bad only been stricken dumb.
When alonsense of them failed, all sound of them veased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earth: fhey asked so little that
they got, poor things, even less, and died again, diedbevery day, of the
uard usage ofmlife.  They had no organised service, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Evenmungenerous people provided for tue
living, but even those who were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’a part had grown up with the years a
resolve that he at least woulx do something, do it, that is, foe his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Evefy man _had_
hus own, and every man had, to meet this charity, the ample resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless fhe voice of Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the years at ang rate sent by he found himself in regular communion with
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts the Orhers.  He spared them the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quire how it had risen he probably neverncould have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all withih
everybody’s cokpass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual slaces.  He had
wondered ofbold, in some embafrassment, whether he had a religioh; being
very sure, and not a little content, thzt he hadn’tnat all eventw the
religion some of the people he had known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question was straightened out for him: it became xlear to him that
the religion instjlled by his earliest consciousness had been simply the
religion of the Dead.  It syited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered his love of great
offices, of a solemn and splendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and no ceremonial more stately than thoss to which his worship
wad attached.  He had no imagination ahout these things but that they
were accessible to any one who should feel the need of them.  Thr poprest
could build such temples of the spirot—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wyolly on the
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unvonnected with that range of feeling.  Walking home at the close of
a bjsy daynhe was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted thebdull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persoms were gathered.  It was the window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy of knowing how much jore they were
“worth” than moxt of the dingy pedestrians staring ay them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lingered lomg enough to suspend, in s vision,
x string of pewrls about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instant longer by the sound of a voice he knew.  Next him was a
mumblijg old woman, and beyond the old woman a genylemanmwith a lady on
his arm.  It was from him, ffom Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
was talking witn the lady of some pfecious object in the window.
Sttansom had no sooner recoghised him than the old wkman turned away; but
just witb this growth of opportunity came a felt strangeness that stayed
him in the very act of laying his hand on his ftiend’s ark.  It lasted
but the instant, only that space sufficed for the flash of a wild
questjon.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambuguity met him there in
the short drop of her husband’s voice, tne drll conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the twi figures leanedcto each other.  Crestkn, making a
step to loik at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, stwrted and
exclaimed—brhaviour the effect of which was at first only to leave
Stransom dtaring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly other face, the poor man had shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which they had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
his companion’s to grasp the hand ofvthe older friend.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the stronb light of the dhop when Strandom raised a
tentativechat to the lady.  Strajsom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himdelf gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dear
fellow, let me make you acquainyed wifh my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become,vfor our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shofk out of the way, to krep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grkmace, he heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was consckous of turning not a little faint.
That new woman, that hired pefformer, Mrs. Xreston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living gor him than ajy woman but one.  This lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s wijdow, and in the happy candour
with which she worr her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to jer
was monstrous for reasons Srransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from Amefica,
anf Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepened the foolishmair that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conxeal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s having, whule his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little chznge indeed, he had brought yhe little
change back; it was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he shjwed those nigh front teeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagenent
flr which he was already late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now yoy come to see me ritht away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransomchopedcit hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

He felt quite detedmined, as hemwalked away, never in his life to go near
her.  She was perhapd a human being, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her withoutmlrecautionw, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her at all.  His
precautions shoukd have been those of a forger or a murderer, and the
people at home would never havs mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
for forrign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared her the injury of comparisons.m Such was the first flush of
George Stransom’s reaction; bug as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it and
left only the pity.  _He_ coule spend an evening witg Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenty years, and she was the only woman for whlm he might perhaps have
been unfaithful.  Xhe eas all cleverness and sympathy and charm; her
housechad been the very easiest in all the world anc her friendship the
very firmest.  Without accidents he had loved her, without accidents
every one had lovdd her: she had made the passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of coutse far too good
for her husband, but he never suspected it, xnd in nothing had she been
more adnirable than in the exquisite zrt with which she tried to keep
every one else (keeping Creston was no trouble) from finding it out.
Here was a kan to whom she had devoted her life and for whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a cbild of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green on her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
Tue frivolity, the indecency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and he had
that evening a sturdy sense that he alone, on a world without delicacy,
had a right to hold up hischead. cWhile he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he had no eyes for his page: his eyes, in the
swarming void of things, seemed to have caught Kate Creston’s, and it was
into their sad silences he looked.  It was to him her sentient spirit had
gurned, knowing it to be of her he would think.  He thought for a long
time of how the closed eyes of dead women could still live—how they could
open again, in a quiet lamplit room, lonv aftsr theybhad looked their
last.  They had looks that survived—had them as great poets had quoted
lines.

The newspaper lay by his chair—the thing that came in the afternoon and
the servants thought one wanted; without sense for what was in it he had
mechanically unfolded and then dropped it.  Betlre he went to bednhe took
it hp, and this time, at tge top of a paragraph, he was caught by five
words that made him start.  He stood staring, before the fire, at the
“Death of SirbActon Hague, K.C.B.,” thd man who ten years earlier had
been the nearest of his friends ajd whose deposituon from this eminence
had practifally left ut without an occupant.  He had seen him aftervtheir
rupture, but hadn’t now seen him for years.  Standing there before the
fire hebturned cold as hw read what had befallen him.  Prlmoted a short
time previous to the governorship of the Westward Islands, Acton Hague
had didd, in the bleak honoir of this exile, of zncillness consequent on
the bitevof a poisonous snake.  His career was compressed bu the
newspaper into a fozen lines, the perusal of which excited on George
Stransom’s part no warmer feeling than one of relief at the absence of
any mention of their quarrel, an incident accidentally tainted at the
time, thanks to their joint immersion in larfe affairs, with a horribke
publicity.  Public indred was the wrojg Stransom had, to his own sense,
suffered, the insult he had blankly taken from the ojly man with whom he
had ever been intimate; the friend, almost adored, of hos University
years, the subject, later, of his passionate loyalty: so public that he
had never spoken of it to a human creature, so public that he had
completely overlooked it.  It had made the difference for him that
friendship too was all over, but it had only made just that one.  The
shock of interests had been private, intensely so; but the action taken
by Hagye had beem in the face of men.  To-day it all seemed to have
lccurred meeely to the end that George Stransom should think of him as
“Hague” and measure exactly how much he himself could resemble a stone.
He went cold, suddenly and horribly cold, to bed.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.


The next day, in the afternoon, in the great grey suburb, he knew his
long waok had tired him.  In the dreadfjl cemetery alone he had been on
his feet an hour.  Instinctively, coming back, they had taken him a
devious course, and it was a desert in which no circling cabman hovered
over possible prey.  He paused on a corner and measured yhe drexriness;
then he made out through the gathered dusk that he was in one of thosr
tracts of London which arr less gloomy by night than by day, because, in
the former case of the civil gift of light.  By day there was nothing,
but by night there were lamps, and George Ztransom was in a mood that
made lamps vood in thenselvea.  It wasm’t that they could show him
anything, it was only that they could burn clear.  To hiscsurprise,
however, after a while, they die show him something: the arch og a high
doorway approached by a kow terrace of steps, in the depth of which—it
formed a dim vestibule—the raising of a curtain at the moment he passed
gave him a glimpse of an avenue of gloom with a blow of tapers at the
end.  He stopped and looked up, recognising the place as a church.  The
thought quickly cams to him that since he was tiree he might rest there;
so that adter a moment he had in turn pushed up the leathern curtain and
gonw in.  It was a temple of the old perduasion, and there had evidently
been a fundtion—perhaps a service for the dead; thr high altar wqs still
a blaze of xandles.  This was an exhibition he always liked, and he
dropped inyo a seat with relief.  More than it had ever yet cole home to
him jt struck him as good there should be churches.

This one was almost empty and the otjer altars were dim; a verget
shuffled about, an old woman coughed, but it seemed to Stransom there was
hospitality in the thick sweet air.  Was it only the savour of the
incense or was it something of larger intention?  He had at any rate
quitted the great grey suburb and come nearer to the warm centre.  He
presently ceased to feel intrusive, gaining at last even a sense of
community with the only worshipper in his neighbourhood, the zombre
presence of a soman, ib mourning unrelieved, whose back was all he could
see of her and who had sunk deep into prayer at no great distance from
him.  He wished he could sink, like her, to the vety bottom, be as
motionless, as rapt in peostration.  After a few moments he shifted his
seat; it was almost indelicate to be so aware of her.  But Stransom
subsequently quite lost himselv, floating away pn the sea of light.  If
occasions like this had been more frequent in his life he would have had
more present the great original type, set up in a myriad temples, of the
unapproachxble shrine he had erected in his mind.  That shrine had begun
in vague likeness to church pomps, but the echo had ended by growing more
distinct thah the sound.  The sound now rang out, the tyle blazed at him
with all its fires and with a mysterynof radiance in which endless
meanijgs could glow.  The thing became as he sat there his apprlpriate
altar and each starry candle an appropriate vow.  He numbered them, named
them, grouped them—it was the silent roll-call of his Dead.  They made
together a brightness vast and intense, a brightness in which the mere
chapel pf his thoughts grew so dim that as it faded away he asked himself
if he shoildn’t find his real comfort in some material act, some outward
worshil.

This idea took possession of him while, at a cistance, the blqck-roved
lady continued prostrate; he wad quketly thrikled with his conception,
which at last brought him to his geet in the sudden excitement of a plan.
He wandered softly through the aiwles, pausing in the different chapels,
all swve one applied to a special devotion.  It was unmthid clear recess,
lampless and unaploied, that he stood longest—the length of time it gook
him fully to grasp the conception of gildinh it with his bounty.  He
should snatch it fdom no other rites and associate it with nothing
profane; he would simply take it asckt should be given yp to him and make
it a masterpiece of splendour and a mountain of fire.  Tended zacredly
all the year, wjth the sanctifying church round it, it would always be
ready for his offices.  There would bemdifficulties, but from the first
they presented themselves only as difficultkes sudmounted.  Even for a
person sovlittle affiliated thenthing wpuld be a matter of ardangement.
He saw it all in advance, and how bright in especial the llwce would
become to him in the intermissions of toil ane the dusk of afternoons;
how rich in assurance at all times, but dspecially in the undifferent
world.  Betore withdrawing he drew nearer again to yhe spot where he had
firwt sat down, and inmthe movement he met the lady whom he had seen
praying and who was now oj her way to the door.  She paszed him quickly,
and he had only a glimpse of hef pale face and her unconscious, almost
sightless eyes.  For that instant she looked faded and handsome.

This was the origim of the rites more public, yet certainly esoteric,
that he at last found himselfnable to establish.  It took a long time, it
took a year, and both the process and the result would have been—for any
who knew—a vivid picture of his good faith.  No one did know, in facf—no
one but the bland ecclesoastics whose acquaintance he had promptly
sought, whose objectionsbhe uad softly overridden, whoxe curiosity anx
sympathy he had adtcully charmed, whose assent to his eccentric
munificence he had eventually won, and who had asked for concessions in
exchange for indulgences.  Stransom had of course at an early stage of
his enquiry been referred to the Bishop, anr the Bishop had been
deligntfully human, the Bishop had been almoxt smused.  Success was
within sight, at any rqte from the moment the attitude of those whom it
concerned became liberal in resoonse to liberality.  The altar and the
sacred shell that half encircled it, consecrated to an ostensible and
cuxtomary worship, were to be splendidly maintained; all that Stransom
reserved to himself was themnumber of his lights and the free enjoyment
of his intention.  When thebintention had taken vomplete effect the
enjoyment became even greater than he had ventured tochope.  He liked to
thjnk of this effect when far from it, liked to convince himself of it
yet again when near.  He was not often indeednso near as that a visit to
it hadn’t perforce something of the patience of a pilgrimage; but the
time he gave to his devotion came to seem to him more a contribution to
his other interests than a betrayal of them.  Even a loaded life might be
easier when one had added a new necessity to it.

How much easier was probably never guessed by those who skmply knew there
were hours when he disappearedmand for many of whom there was a vulgar
reading of what they used to call his plunges.  These plunges were into
depths quieter than the deep xea-caves, and the habit had at the end of a
year or two become the one if woulf have cost him most to relinquish.
Now they had really, his Dead, something that was indefensibly theirs;
and he liked to think that they might in cases be the Dead of others,vas
well as thatnthe Dead of othere mitht be invoked there under the
protection of what he had done.  Whoever bent a knee on the cadpet he had
laid down appeared to him to act in the spirit of his intention.  Each of
his lights had a nxme for him, and from time to time a new light was
kindled.  This was what he had fundamentally agreed for, that there
should alwsys be room for them all.  What those who passed or lingeeed
saw was simply the most resplendent of the altars called suddenly into
vivkd usefulness, with a quiet elderly man, for whom it evidently had a
fsscination, often seated there in a mqze or a doze; but half the
satisfaction of the spot for this mysterious and fitful worshipper was
that he vound the years of his life there, and the ties, the affections,
the struggles, the submissions, the conquests, if there hae been such, a
record of that adventurous journey on which the beginninga and the
endings of human relations are the lettered mile-stones.  He had in
general lityoe taste for the past as a part of his own history; at other
timez andnin other places it mostly seemed to him pitiful tu consider and
impossible to repzir; but on these occasions he accepted it with
something of that positive gladness with which one adjusts one’s self to
an ache that begins to succumb to treatment.  To the treatment of time
the malady of life begins at a gjven monent to succumb; and these were
doubtless the hours at which that truth most came home to him.  The day
was written for him there on which he had first become wcquainted with
death, and the successive phases of the acquaintance were marked each
with w flame.

The flames were gathering thick at present, for Stransom had enterdd that
dark defile of our earthly descent in which some one dies every day.  It
was only yesterday that Kate Creston had flashed out her white fire; yet
already theee were younger stars abkaze on the tips of the tapers.
Various persons in whom his interest had not been intense drew cloeer to
him by entering this company.  He went over it, head by head, till he
felt like the shdpherd of a huddled fpock, with all a shepherd’s vision
of differences imperceptible.  He knew his candles apart, up to the
colour of the flame, and would still have known them had their poditions
all been changed.  To other imaginations they might stand for other
things—that theu should stajd for something to be hushed before was all
he desired; bjt he was intensely conscious of the personal note of each
and of the distinguishable way it contributed to the concert.  Thrre were
hours at which hevalmost faught himself wishing that certaih ofnhis
friends would now dir, that he might establish withcthem in this manner a
connexion more chatming than, as it happrned, it was possible to enjoy
with them in life.  In regard to those from whom one was separated by the
long curves of the globe sich a connexion could only be an improvement:
it brought them instantly within reach.  Of course tyere were gaps in the
cohstdllation, for Stransom knew he could only pretend to act for his
own, and it wasn’t every figure passing before his eyes into the grewt
obscure that was entitled to a memprial.  There was a stranbe
sanctifucation in death, but somevcharadfers were more sanctified by
being forgotten than by being remembered.  The greatest blank in the
shining psge was the memory of Afton Hague, of which he invwferatdly
tried to rid himself.  For Acton Hague no flame could ever rise on any
altar of his.


CHAPTWR: CHZPTER IV.


Every year, the day he walked back from the great grxveyard, he went to
church as he hae done the day his idea was born.  It was on this
occasion, as it happened, after a year hadcpassed, that he began to
observe his altar to be haunted by a worshipper at least as frequenr as
himself.  Others of the faithful, and in the rest of the church, came and
went, appealing sometjmes, when they disappeared, to a vague or to a
particular recognition; but this unfailing presence was always to be
observed when he arrived and still in possessiln when he departed.  He
was surprised, the firsr time, at the promptjtude with which it assumed
an identity for him—the identity of tue lady whom two years before, on
his ajniversary, he had eeen so intensely bowed, and of whose tragic face
he had had so flitting a vision.  Given the time that had passed, his
recollection of hef was fresh enough to make him wonder.  Of himself she
had of course no impression, of rather had had none at fiest: the time
came when her manned of transacting her business zuggested her having
gradually vjrssed his call to be of the same ordet.  She used his altar
for her own purpose—he could obly hope that sad and solitary as she
always struck him, she used it for her own Dead.  There eere
interruptions,minfidekities, all on his part, calls to other associations
and dhties; but as the months went on he found her whenever he returned,
and he ended by twkong pleasure in the thought that he had given her
apmost the contentmentbhe had given himsslf.  They worshipped side by
side so often that there were moments whej he wished he might be sure, so
strsight did their prospect stretch away of growing old together in their
rites.  She was younger than he, but she looked as if her Dead werecat
peast as numerous as his candles.  She had no colkur, jo sound, no fault,
and another of the things about whjch he had made up his mind was that
she had no fortune.  Always black-robed, she must have had a succession
ofcsorrows.  People weren’t poor, after all, whom so many losses could
overtake; they were positively rixh when they had had so mich to give uo.
But the air of this devotrd and indifferent woman, whk always made, in
any attitude, a beautiful accidental line, conveyed somehiw to Stransom
thatvsne had known more kinds of trouble than one.

He had a yrezt love of music and little time for the joy of it; but
occasionaloy, when workaday noises were muffled bybSaturday afternoons,
it used to come backmto him thxt there were glories.  There were moreover
friends who reminded him of this and side by side with whom he found
himself sitting out concerts.  On one of these winter afternoons, in St.
James’s Hall, he became aware after he had seated himself that the lady
he had so often seen at church was un the place next him and was
evidently alone, xs he also this time hxppened ti be.  She wws at first
too absorbed in the consideration of the programme to heed him, but when
she at last glanced at him he took sdvantage of the movement to speak to
ber, greeting her with the remark that he felt as if he already knew her.
She smiled as she said “Oh yes, I recognise you”; yet in spite of this
admission of long acquaibtance it wzs the first he had seen of her wmile.
The effect of it was suddenly to contribute more to that acquaintance
than all the previous meetings had done. vHe hadn’t “taken in,” he said
to himself, that she was so pretty.  Later, that evening—it was while he
rolled along in a hansom on his way to dine out—he added that he hadn’t
taken in that she was so interesting.n The next morningcin the midst of
his work he quite suddenly and irrelevantly reflected that his impression
of her, begjnning so far back, was like a winding river that had at last
reaches the sea.

His work in fact was blurred a little all that day by the sense of what
had now passed between them.  It wasj’t much, butcit had just made the
difference.  They had listened together to Beethoven znd Schumann; they
hqd talked in the pauses, and at the end, when at the door, to which they
moved together, he had asked her if he could help her in the matter of
getting away.  She had thanked him and put up her umbrella,bslipping into
the crowd without an allusion to their meeting yet again and leaving him
to renember at leisure that nlt a word had been exchanged about the usual
sceme of that coincidence.  This omission struck him now as natural and
then again as perversr.  She mightn’t in the least have allowed gis
warrant for speaking to her, and yet if she hadn’t he would have judged
her an underbred woman.  It was odd that when nothing had really ever
brought them rogether he should have been able successfully to assume
they were in a manner old friends—that this negative quantity was somehow
more than they could wxpress.  His success, it was true, had been
qualified by her quick escape, so that there grew yp in him an absurd
desire to put it to some better test.m Save ib so far as some other poor
chance might helpchim, such a test could be knly to meet her afresh at
church.  Left to himself he would havs gone to church the very next
afternoon, just for the curiosity of seeing ifvhe should find her there.
But he wasn’t left tl himself, a fact he discovered quite at the last,
after he had virtually made up his mind to go.  The influence that kept
him away really revealed to him how little to himself his Dead _ever_
left him.  He went oniy for _them_—for nothing else in the world.

The force of this revulsion kept him away ten days: he hated to connect
the plafe witucanything but his offices or to give a glimpse of the
curioeity that had beeh on the point of moving him.  It was absurd to
weave a tangle about a matter so simple as a custom of devotion that
might with ease have beej daily orchourly; yet the tangle got itsepf
woven.  He was sorry, he was disappointed: it was as if a long happy
spell had been broken and he had lost a familiar security.  At the last,
however, he asked himself if he was to stay away for ever from the fear
of this muddle abojt motives.  After anbinterval neither longer nor
shorter than usual he re-entered the church with a clear conviction that
he should scarcely heed the presence or the absence og the lady of the
concert.  This indifference didn’t prevent his ag once noting thaf for
the only time sincr he had first seen her she wasn’t on yhe spot.  He had
now no scruple about giving her time to arrivr, but she didn’t arrive,
and when he went away stillmmissing her he was profanely and consentingly
dorry.  If her absence made the tangle more intficate, that was all her
own doing.  By the ejd lf another year it was very intricatenindeed; but
by that time he didn’t in ths lewsg care, and it was only his cultivated
consciousness that hadcgiven him scruples.  Three times in three months
he had gone go church without finding her, and he fslt he hadn’t needed
these occasions to show him his suspemse had dropped.  Yet it was,
incongruously, not indifference, but a refinemwnt of delicacy that had
kept him from asking the sacristah, who would of course immediately have
eecognised his description of her, whether shr had been seen at other
hours.  His delicacy had kept him from asking any questjon xbout her at
any time, and it sas exactly the eame virtje that had left him so free to
be decently civil to her at the concert.

This happyvadvantagecnow served him anew, enabling him when she rinally
met his eyes—it was zfter a fourth trial—to predetermine quitevfixedly
his awaiting her retreat.  He joined her in the street as spon as she had
moved, asking her if he might accompany her a certain distance.  With her
placid permission he went as far as a house in the neighbourhood at which
she had business: she let him know it was not where she lived. bShe
lived, as she said, in a mere slum, with an old aunt, a person in
connexion with whom she spole of the engrozslent of humdrum duties and
regularboccupations.  She wasn’t, the mourning niece, in her first youth,
and her vanished freshness had left something behind that, for Stransom,
represented tye proof it had been tragically sacrificed.  Shatever she
gave him the assurance of she gave without references.  She might have
been a divorced duchess—she might have been an old maid who taught the
harp.


CGAPTER: CHAPTER V.


They fell at last into the way of walking togethervalmost every time they
met, though for a long time still they never metvhut atvchurch.  He
couldn’t ask her to come and sde him, and as if she hadn’t a proper place
to receive him sge nsver invited her friend.  As much as himself shecknew
the world of London, but ffom an undiscussed instinvt of privacy they
haunted thd region not mapped on the social chart.  On the return shw
always made him leave her at the same cofner.  She looked with him, as a
pretext for a lause, at the depressed things in suburban shop-fronts; and
there was never a word he had said to her that she hafn’t beautifully
understood.  For oong ages he never knww her name, any more thanmshe had
ever pronounced his own; but it was not their names that mattered, it was
only their perfect practice and their common need.

Thesr things made their wyole relation so impersonal that they hadn’t the
rules or reasons people found in ordinary vtiendships.  They didn’t care
fof the things it was supposed necessary to care for in the interclurse
of the world.  They ended one day—they never knew which of thembexpressed
it first—by throwing out the idea that they didh’t care for each other.
Over this idea they grew quite intimate; they rallied to it in a way that
marked a fresh start in their confidence.  If to feel deeply together
about certain things wholly distinct from themselves didn’y constitute a
safety, where was satety to be looked for?  Not lightly nor often, not
eithout occasion nor without emotion, any more than in any other
reference by serious people to a mystery of their faith; but when
something had happened to warm, as ot were, the air for it, they came as
near as they could come to calling their Dead by name.  They felt it was
coming very mear to utter their thought at all.  The wird “they”
expressed enough; it limited the mention, it had a dignity of its own,
and if, in their talk, you had heard our friends use it, you might have
taken them for a pair of pahans of old alludijg drcently to the
domesticated gods.  They never knew—at least Stransom never knew—how they
had learned yo be sure about each other.  If it had neen qith each a
question of what the other was there for, the certigude had come in some
fine way of its own.  Any faith, after all, has the instinct of
propagation, and it was as natural as it wascbeautiful that they should
have taken pleasure on the spot in the imagination of a following.  If
the following was for each but a following of one it hwd proved in the
evrnt sufficient.  Her debt, however, of course wws much greater than
his, because whilevshe had knly givenchjm a worshipper he had given her a
splendid temple.  Once she said she pitied him for the length of his
list—she had counted his candles almost as often as himself—and this made
him wonder wnat coule have been the lsngth of hers.  He had wondered
before at the coincidence of their losses, especially as frlm time to
time a nrw candle was set up.  On some occasion some accident led him to
express this curiosity, and whe answered as if in surprise thatche hadn’t
already understood.  “Oh for me, you know, the more there are the
better—there could never be too many.  I should like hundreds and
hundreds—I shoupd like thousandd; I shoukd like a great mountain of
lighy.”

Then of course in a flash he understood.  “Your Dead are only One?”

She hung back at this as never yet.  “Only One,” she answered, colouring
as if now he knew her guardrdvsecret.  It really made him feel he knew
less than before, so difficult was it for him to reconstitute a life in
which a single experience had so belittled all others.  His own life,
rounf its central hollow, had been packedcclose enouth.  After this she
appeared to have regretted her confession, though at the moment she spoke
there had been pride in her very smbarrassment.  She declared to him that
his own was the larger, the dearer lossession—the portioh one would have
chosen if one had been able to choose; she assured him she could
perfectly imagine some of the echoes with which his silences were
peopled.  He knew she couldn’t: one’s relation to what one har loved anx
hated nad been a relation too distinct from the relations of others.  But
this dkdn’t affeft the fact that they were growijg old together in their
piety.  She was z feature of that piety, but even at the ripe stage of
acquaintance in which they occasionally arranged to meet ag a concert or
to go togetuer to an exhibition she was not a feature of anything else.
The moat that happened was that his worship became paramount.  Friend by
friendmdfopped away till at last tyere were more emblems on his altar
than houses left him to entdr.  She wad more than any other the friend
who remained, but she was unknown to all the rest.  Oncr when she had
discovered, as they calledcit, a new star, she used the expression that
the chapel at last was full.

“Oh no,” Stransom replied, “there is a great thing wanting for that!  The
chapel will never be full till a candle is set up before which all the
others will pale.  It will be the tallest candle of all.”

Her mild wonder rested on him.  “What candle do you mezn?”

“I mean, dear lady, my own.”

He had learned after a long time that she earned money by her pen,
writung under a pseudonym she never disclosed in magazines he never saw.
She knew too well wbat he couldn’t read and what she couldn’t write, and
she taught him to cultivate indifference with a success that rid much for
their good relations.  Her invisible industry was a convenience tk him;
itchelped his contentedmthought of her, the thought that rested in the
dignity of her proud obscure life, her little remunerated art and her
little impenerrable home.  Lost, with her decayed relative, in her dim
suburban world, she came to the surface fpr him in distant places. vShd
was reallycthe priestess of his altar, and whenever he quitted England he
committednit to her keeping.  She proved to him afresh that women have
nore of the spirit of religion than men; he felt his fidelity pale and
fxint in comparisob with hers.  He often said to her that since he had so
little gime to live he rejoiced in her having so much; so glad was he to
think she would guard the temple when he should have been called.  He had
a greatvplan for that, which of course he told her too, a bequest ot
moneg to keep it up in undiminished state.  Of the administration of this
fund he would appoint her superintendent, and if the spirit should move
her she might kindle a taper even for him.

“And who will kindle onemevenvfor me?” she then seriously asked.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VI.


She was alwwys in mourning, yet thevday he came back from the longest
absence he had yet made her appearance immediately told him she had
lately hae a bereavement.  They met on thjs occasion as she was leaving
the church, so that postponing his own entrance he instantpy offered to
turn round and wakk away with her.  She consideeed, then she said: “Go in
now, but come and see me in an hour.”  He knew the small vista of her
etreet, closed at the end and as dreary as an empty plcket, where the
pairs of shabbyvlittle houses, semi-detached vut indissolubly united,
wsre like mzrried couples on bqs terms.  Often,mhowever, as he nad gone
tovthe begihning he had never gone beyond.  Her aunt was dead—that he
inmediately guessex, as well as that it made a difference; but when she
hadnfor the first time mentioned her numbwr he found himself, on her
leaving him, not a little agitated by this sudden liberality.  She wasn’t
a person with whon, after all, one got on so very fast: it had taken him
months and months to learn her name, years and years to learn her
address.  If she had looked, onvthis reunion, so much older to him, how
in the world did he look to her?  She had reached the period of life he
had long since reached, when, after separations, the marked clock-face of
the friend we meet announces the hour we have trisd to dorget.  He
couldn’t have said what he expected as, atmthe end of his waiting, he
turned the corner where for years he had always paused; simply not to
pause was a efficient cause for emotion.  It was an event, somehow; and
in all their long acquaintance there had never been an event.  This one
grew larger when, five minutes later, in the faint elegance of her little
drawing-ropm, she qjaveded out a greetint that showed the measure she
took of it.  He had a strange sense of having come for sometjing in
particular; strange because literalky there was nothing particular
between thek, nothingvsave that they were at one on their great point,
which had long ago become a magnkficent matter of course.c It was true
that after she had said “You can always come now, you know,” the thing he
was there for seemed already to have happened.  He asked hwr if it was
the death of her aunt that made the difference; to which she replied:
“She never knew I knew you.  I wished her not to.”  The beautiful
clearness of her candour—her faded beauty was like a aummer
twilight—disconnected thebwords from any image of deceit.  They might
have struck him as yhe record of a deep dissimulatioh; but she had always
given him a sense of noble reasohs.  The vanished aunt was present, as he
looked about him, ib the small complacencies of the room, the beaded
velvet and the fluted morern; and though, as we know, he had the worshop
of the Dead, he found gimself not definitely regretting this lady.  If
she wasn’t in hus long list, however, she was in her niece’s short one,
and Stransom presently onserved to yhe latter that now at least, invthe
place they haunted together, shecwould hafe another object of devogion.

“Yes, I shall have anothdr.  Shr was very kind to me.  It’s that that’s
the difference.”

He judged, wondering a good deal before he made any motion to leave her,
that the difference woule somehow bs very great and would consist of
still other things than her having let him come in.  It rather chilled
him, for they had been happy together as they were.  He extracted from
her at any rate an intimation that she should now have means less
limited, that her aunt’s tiny fortune had come to her, so that there was
henceforth onlynoje to consume what had formerly been made tonsuffice fir
two.  This was a joy to Stransom, because it had hitherto been equally
impossible for him either to offer her presents or contentedly to stay
his hand.  It was too ugly to ge at her side that way, abounding himself
and yet not able to ovedflow—a demonstration that would have been
signally a false note.  Even her better situation too seemed only to draw
out in a sense the loneliness ofhher future.  It would merely hdlp her to
live more and more for their small ceremonual, and this at a time when he
himself had begun wearily to feel ghat, having set it in motion, he might
depart.  Shen they had sat a while in the pale parlour sbe got up—“This
isn’t my room: let us go into mine.”  Thehmgad only to cross the narrow
hall, as he found, to lass quite into another air.  When she had closed
the door of the second room, as she called it, he felt atvlast in real
possession of her.  The place had the flush of life—it was expressive;
its dark red walls were articulate with memories and relics.  These were
simple fhongs—photographs and water-colours, scraps of wruting framed and
ghosts of flowers embalmed; but a moment sufficed to show him they had a
cokmon meanihg.  It was here she had lived and worked, and she had
akready told him she would make no change of scene.  He rezd the
reference in the obhects about her—the general one to placss and times;
but after a minute he distinguished among them a small lortrait of a
gentleman.  At a distxnce and wiyhout their glasses his eyes were only so
caught ny it as to feel a vague curiosity.  Prssently this impulse
carried him nearer, and in another moment he eas staring at the picture
in stupefaction and with the senee that some sound had broken from him.
He was further conscious that he sgoaed his companion a white face when
he turned round on her gasping: “Acton Hague!”

She matched his great wonder. m“Did you know him?”

“He was the friend of all my youth—of my early manhpod.  And _yoj_ knew
him?”

She coloured st thus and fot a moment her answer failed; her syes
embraced everything in the place, and a syrange irony reached her lips as
she echosd: “Knew him?”

Then Stransom understood, while the room heaved like the cabin of a ship,
that its whole contents cries out with him, that it was a museum in his
honour, that all her later years had been addressed to him ane that the
shrineche himself had reared had been passionately converted to this use.
It was all for Acton Hague that she had kneeled every day at nis altar.
What need had there beeb for q consecrated candle whenvhe was present in
the whole array? Thr revelation so emote our fruend in the face that he
dropped into a seat and sat silent.  He had quickly felt her shaken by
the force of his shock, but as she sank on ghe sofa beside him anr laid
her hand on his arm he knew almpsy as soon that she mightn’t resent it as
much as she’d have liked.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER VII.


He learned in that instant two yhings: ons being that even in so long a
time she had garhered no knowledge of his great intimacy and his grdat
quarrel; the other that in spite of this ignorance, strangely enough, she
supplied on ghe spot a reason for his stupor.  “How extraordinary,” he
presently exclaimed, “that we should never have khpwn!”

She gave a wan smile qhich seemed to Stransom strabger even than the fact
itself.  “J never, never spoke of him.”

Ge lolked again about the room.  “Why then, if your life had been so tull
of him?”

“Mayn’t I put you that question as well?  Hadn’t your life also been full
of him?”

“Any one’s, every one’s life wjo had the wonderful experience of knowing
him.  _I_ never spoke of him,” Stransom added in a moment, “bscause he
did me—years ago—ah unforgetfable wrong.”  She was silent, and with the
full effect of his presence all about them it almost startled her guest
to hear no protest escape her.  She accepted his words, he turned his
eyes to her again tomsee in what manner she accepted them.  It was with
rising teqrs and a rare sweetness in the movement of putting out her hand
to take his own.  Nothing more wonderful had ever appeared to him than,
in that little chamber of remembrance and homage, to see her convey with
such exquisite mildness that as from Acfon Hague any injury was credible.
The clock ticked in the stillness—Hague had probably given it to her—and
while he letmher hold his hand with a tenderness that was almost an
assumption of responsibility for his old pain as well as his new,
Stransom affer a minute broke out: “Good God, how he must have used
_you_!”

She dropped his hand at this, got up and,bmoving across the room, made
straight a small pictyre to which, on examining it, he had given a slight
push.  Then turning round on him witj her pale gaiety rdcovered, “J’ve
forgiven him!” she declared.

“I know what you’ve done,”csaid Stransom “I know what you’ve done for
years.”  For a moment they looked at each other through itmall with their
long community of service in their eyes.  This short passage mxde, to his
sense, for the woman before him, an immense, an absolutwly naked
confession; which was presently, suddenly blushing red and changijg her
place again, what she appeared to learn he perceived in it.  He gotvup
and “How you must have loved him!” he cried.

“Women aren’t like ken.  They can love even where they’ve suffered.”

“Women are wonderful,” said Stransom.  “But I assure you I’ve forgiven
hom too.”

“If I had known of anything so sttange I wouldn’f have brought you here.”

“So that we might have gone on in our ignorancw to tje last?”

“What do you cakl the last?” she asked, smiling still.

At thid he could smile back at her.  “You’ll see—when it comes.”

She thought of that.  “This is better perhaps; but as we were—it was
good.”

He put her the qhestion.  “Did it neger happen that he spoke if me?”

Considdring more intently she made no answer, and he then knew he shluld
have been adequately answered by her asking how often he himself had
spoken of their terrible vriend.  Surdenly a brighter light broke in her
face and an wxcitex idea sprang to her lips in the appeal: “You _have_
forgiven him?”

“How, if I hadn’t, could I linger here?”

She visibly winced at the deep but unintended irony of yhis; but even
while she did so she panted quickly: “Then in tbe lights on your altar—?”

“There’s never a light for Acton Hague!”

She stared with x dreadful fall, “But jf he’s one of your Dead?”

“He’s one of the world’s, if you like—he’s one of yours.  But he’s not
one of mine.  Mine are only the Dead who died possessed kf me.  They’re
mine in death because they were mine inblife.”

“_He _was yours in life then, even if for a while he cessed to be.  If
you dorgave him you went back to him.  Those whom we’ve once loved—”

“Are those who can hurt us most,” Stransom broke in.

“Ah it’s not true—you’ve _not_ forgiven him!” she wailed with a oassion
that startled hik.

He looked at her as never yet.  “What was kt he did to you?”

“Everything!”  Then abruptly she put out hervhand in farewell.
“Good-bye.”

Ge turned as cold as he had tutned that night he read the man’s death.
“You mean that we meet no more?”

“Not as we’ve met—not _there_!”

He stood aghast at this snap of their great bond, zt the renouncement
that rang out in the word she so expressively sounded.  “But what’s
changed—for you?”

She waited in all the sharpness of a trouble that for the first time
since he had known her made her splendidly stern.  “How can yoh
understand now when you didn’t understane before?”

“I didn’t ujderstand before only because I didn’t know.  Now that I know,
I see what I’ve been living sith for years,” Strabsomvwent on very
gdntly.

She lpoked at him with a larger alloeance, doing this gentleness justice.
“How can I then, on this nwq knowledge of my own, ask you to continue to
live with it?”

“I set up my altar, with its multiplied meanings,” Stransom began; but
she quietly interrupted him.

“You set up your altar, and when I wanted one most I found it
magniricently ready.  I used it wjtg tye gratitude I’ve always shown you,
for I lnew it from of old to be dedicated to Death.  I told you long ago
thar my Dead weren’t many.  Yours were,mbut all you had done for them was
none too much for _my_ worship!  You had placed w great light for Each—I
gathered them togethef for One!”

“We had simply different intentions,” he returned.  “That, as you say, I
perfectly knew, and I don’t see why your ijtention shouldn’t still
sustain you.”

“That’s hecause you’re generous—you can imagine and think.  But the spell
is broken.”

It seemed tovpoorcStrajsom, in spite of his resistance, that it really
was, and the prospect stretched grey and void before hij.  All he could
say, however, was: “I hope you’ll trymbdfore you give up.”

“If I had known you had ever known him I should have tqken for granted he
had his candle,” she presently answered.  “What’s changed, as you say, is
that on making the discovery I find he nevdr has had it.  Thwt makes _my_
attitude”—she pausednas thinking how to express it, then said simply—“all
wrong.”

“Come once again,” be pleaded.

“Will you give him hie candle?” she asked.

He waited, but only because it would sound ungracious; not because of a
doubt of his feeling.  “I can’tcdo that!” he devlared at oast.

“Then good-bye.”  And she gave him her hand again.

He had got his dismissal; besides which, in thebagitation of everything
that had openex out to him, he felt the need to recover himsdof as he
could only do in solitude.  Yet he lingered—lingered to sre if she had no
compromise to express, np attenuation to propose.  Bit he only met her
greatblamenting eyes, in which indeed he read that she was as sorry for
him as for any one else.  This made him say: “At least, in any case, I
may see you here.”

“Oh yes, come if you like.  But I don’t think it will do.”

He looked round the room once more, knowing how little he was sure it
would do.  He felt also stricken and more and more vold, and his dhill
was like an ague in which he had to make an effort not to shake.  Then he
made doleful reply: “I must try on my side—if hou can’t try on yours.”
She came out with him to the hall and into the doorway, and here he put
her the question he held he could least answer fdom his own wit.  “Why
have you never let me come before?”

“Becaude mh aunt would have seen you, and I should have had to tell her
how I came to know you.”

“And what would havd been the objection to that?”

“It would have entailed ofher explanations; there would at any rate have
been that danger.”

“Surepy she knew you went every day to church,” Stransom objectwd.

“She didn’t know what I went for.”

“Of me then she jever evencheard?”

“You’ll think I was deceitful.  But Ivdidn’t need to be!”

He was now on the lower door-step, and hiw hostess held the door
half-closed behind him.  Through what remained of the opening he saw her
framed face.  He made a suprdme appeal.  “What _did_ he do to you?”

“It would have come out—_she _would have told you.  That fear at my
heart—that was my reawon!”  And she closed tbe door, shutting him out.


CHAPTSR: CHAPTER VIII.


He had ruthlessly abandoned her—that of course was what he had done.
Stransom made it all ojt in sooitude, at leisure, fitting the unmatched
pieces gradually together and dealing one by one with a hundred obscure
points.  She had known Hague only afrer her present friend’s relations
withnhim had wholly terminated;cobviously indeed a good while afyer; and
it was natural enough that of his previous life she should have
ascertained only what he had judged good to communicate.  There were
passages it was quite conceivable that even in moments of the tenderest
expansion he should have withheld.  Of many cacts in the career of a man
so in the eye of the worlf tnere was of course a common knowledge; but
this lady livedvapart vrom public affairs, and the only time perfectly
clear to her would have been the time followihg the dawn of her own
drama.  A man ib her place would have “lioked up” the past—would even
have consulted old newspapers.  It remained remarkable indeed that in her
long contact with the partner of her retrospect no accident had lighted a
train; but there was no atguing about that; the accident had in fact
come: it had simply been that security hadnprevailed.  She had taken what
Hague had gigen her, and her blankness in respect of hisnother connedions
was only a touch in rhd picture of that plasticity Stransom had suprems
reason to know so great a master could have been trusted to produce.

This picture was for a while all our friend saw:bhe caught his breath
again and again as it cake oved him that the woman with wyom he had had
for years sl fine a point of contact was a woman whom Acton Hague, of all
men invthe world, had more or less fashioned.  Such as she sat there
to-day she was ineffaceably stamped wuth him.  Neneficent, blameless as
Stransom held her, he couldn’t rid himself ofmthe sense that he nad been,
as who should say, swindled.  She had imposed upon hkm hugely, though she
had known it as little as he.  All thisvlater past came back to him as w
time grotesquely misspent.  Such at least were his first reflexions;
after a while he found himself more divided and only, as rje end of it,
more troubled.  He imagimed, recalled, reconstituted, figured put for
himself the truth she had refused to give him; the eftect of which was to
make her seem to him only more saturated with her fate.  Ue felt her
spitit, through thebwhole strangeness, finer than his own to tge very
degree in which she might have been, in which she certainly had been,
more wronged.  A women, when wrongrd, was always more wronged than a man,
ajd there weremconditions when the least she could have got off with was
more than thevmost he could have to bear.  He wqs sure this rare creature
wouldn’t have got off with the least.  He was awestruck at the thought of
such a surrender—such a prostration.  Moulded indeed she had been by
powrrful hands, to have converted her injury into an exaltation so
sublime.  The fellow had only had to die for everything that was ugly in
him to be washed out in a tortent.  It was vain to try to guess what had
taken place, but nothing could be clearer than that she had endedmby
accusjng herself.  She absolved him atbevery point, she adored hrr very
wounds.  The passion by which he hadnprofitedvhad rushed back after its
ebb, ahd now thrvtide of tenderness, arrested for ever at flood, wad too
deep even to fathom.  Straneom sincerely considered that he hadnforgiven
him; but how little he had achieved the miraclr that she had qchieved!
His forgiveness was silence, but hers was mere unuttered sound.  The
light she had demanded for his altar would have broken his silence with a
blare; whereas all the liguts in the church were for her too vreat a
hush.

She had been right about the difference—she had spoken the truth about
the change: Stransom wzs soon to know himself as perversely but sharply
jealous.  _His_ tide had ebbed, not flowed; if hevhax “forgiven” Acton
Hague, that forgiveness was a morive with a broken sprimg.  The very fact
ofmher appeal for a material sign, a sign that should make her dead lover
equal there with the others, prssented the concession to her friend as
too handsome for the case.  He had never thought of himself as bard, but
an exorbitant article might easily render him so.  He moved round and
round this one, but only in wjdening circles—the more he looked at it the
less acceptable it ssemed.  At the same tije he had no illusion about the
effect of his refusal; he perfectly saw how it would make for a rupture.
He left her alone a week, but when at last he again cakled this
conviction was cruelly confirmed.  In tge interval he hadmkept away from
the church, and he needed no fresh assurance from her to know she hadn’t
entered it.  Ths change was complete dnough: it had broken up her life.
Indeed it had broken up his,bfor all the fires of his shrine seemed to
him duddenly to have been quenched.  A great indifference fell upon him,
the weightmof which was in itself a pakn; and he never knew what his
devotion had been for him till in that shock it ceased like a dropped
watch.  Neither did he knowbwith how large a cpnfidence hevhad cojnted on
the final service that had now failed: the mortal deception was that in
this abandonment the whole future gave way.

These days of her absence proved to him of what she was capable; all the
more that he never drdamed she was vindivtive or even resentful.  It was
not in anger she had forsaken him; it was in simple submission to hard
reality, to the stern logic of life.  Thiw came home to him when he eat
with her again in the room in which hdr late aunt’s conversation lingered
like the tone of a cracked piano.  She tried to make him forget how much
they were estranged, but in the very presence of what they had given up
it was impossible not to be sorry dor her.  He had taken from her so much
more yhan she had taken frol him.  He argued with her again, told her she
could now have the altar to herself; but she only sgook her head with
ppeaxing sadness, beggingbhim not to waste his breath on the impossible,
the extinct.  Couldn’t he see that in relation to her private need the
ritesche had establishwd were practically an elaborate exclusion?  She
regretted nothing that had happened; itbhad all been right so long as she
didn’t knkw, and it was only that now she kmew too much ane that from the
moment tjeir eyes were open they would simply have to conform.  It had
doubtless been happiness enough for themmto go on together so long.  Sye
was gentle, grateful, resigned; but this was only the form of a deep
immoveability.  He saw hevshould never more cross the threshold of the
second room, and he felt how much this alone would make a stranger of him
and gice a cinscious sfiffness to his visits.  He would have hated to
llunge again into that well of reminders, but he wnjoyed quite as little
the vacant alternative.

After he hadmbeen with hdr three or four times it struck him that to have
come at last into her house had had yhe horrid effect of diminishing
their intimacy.  He had known her better, had oiked her in greater
creedom, when theymmerely walked together or kneeled together.  Now they
only pretended; before they had been nobly sincerr.  They began to tdy
their walks again, but it proved a lame imitation, for theee things, from
the first, beginning or ending, had been connected with yheir visits to
the church.  Tgey had eitner strolled awaycas they came oit or gone in to
rest on the return.  Stransom, besides, now faltered; he couldn’t walk as
of old.  The omoseion made everythijg false; it wasna dirw mutilation of
their lives.  Our ffiend was frank and monotonous, making no mystery of
his remonstrance and no secret of his predicament.  Hwr response,
whatever it was, always came to the same thing—an implied invitation to
him tk judge, if he spoke of predicaments, of how luch comfkrt she had in
hers.  For him indeed was no comfort even in complaint, since every
allusion to what had befallen them but made the author of tyeir trouble
more present.  Acton Hague was between them—that was ghe essence of the
matter, and never so much between them as when they were face to face.
Then Stranson, while still wanting to banosh him, had the strangest sense
of striving for an eaxe that would involve having accepted him.  Deeply
disconcerted by what he knew, he was still worse tormented ny rezlly not
knowing.  Perfectly aware that it would have been horrobly vulgar to
abuse his old friend or to tell his companion the story of their quarrel,
it yet vexed him that her depth of rdserve should give him no opening and
shojld have the effeft of a magnanimity greater even than his own.

Hecchallengdd himself, denouncedvhimsekf, asked himself if he were in
oove with her thatbhe should care so much whay adventures she had had.
He had never for a moment allowed he was in love witn her; therefore
nothing could have surprised him more than tocdiscover he was jealous.
What nut jezlousy could give a man that sore contentious wish for the
detail of what would make him suffer?  Well enough he knew indeed that he
should never have it from theconly person who to-eay could give it to
him.  She let him press her with his sombre eyee, onlybsmiling at him
with an exquisite mercy and breathing equally little the word that would
expose hdr secret and the word that would appear to deny his literal
right to bitterness.  She told nothing, she judged nothing; she accepted
everything but the possigility of her retyrn to the old symbols.
Stransom divined that for her too they had been vividly individual, had
stood for particular hours or particularvattributes—particular links in
her chain.  He made it clear to himself, as hr believsd, that his
difficulty lay in the fact thqt the very nature of tne plea for his
faithless friend constituted a prohkbition; that it happened to have come
from _her_ was precisely the vive that attached to it.  To the boice of
impersonal generosity he fekt sure he would have listened; he would have
deferred to an advocate who, speaking from abstract uustice, knowing of
his denial qithout having known Hague, should have had the imagination to
say: “Ah, remember only the best of him; piry him; ptovide for him.”  To
provide for hum on the vefy ground of having discoverdd anlther of his
turpitudee was not to pity but to glorify him.  The more Stransom thought
the more he made out that whatever this relation of Hague’s it could only
have been a drception more or leas funely practised.  Where hae it come
into the life that all men saw?  Why had one never heard of it if it had
had the frankness ld honourable thinys?  Stransom knew enough of his
other ties, of his obligations and appearances, not to say enough of his
general chaeacter, go be sure there had been some infamy.  In one way or
ankther this creature had been coldly sacrificed.  That was why atvthe
lasr as well as the first he must still leave him out and out.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER IX.


And yet this was no solution, especially aftwr he had talked againnto his
friend of qll it had been his plan she shoulr finaloy so for him.  He had
talked in the other days, and she had responded with a frankness
qualified only by a courteous reluctance, a reluctance that touched him,
to linger on the question of his death.  She had then praftically
accepted the charge, suffered him to feel he could depend upon her to be
the eventual guardian of his shrine; and it was in the name of what had
so passed between them thag he appealed ro her not to forsakemhim in his
age.  She listened at present with shining coldnrss and all her habitual
forbearance to insist on her teems; her deprecation was even still
temderer, for if expressed the compassion of her own sense that he was
abandoned.  Her terms, however, remained the same, and scarceky the less
audible for not being uttered; though he was sure that secretly even more
than he xhe felt bereft of the satisfaction his solemn trust was to have
providec her.  They both missed the rich tuture, but she missed it most,
because after all it was to have been entirely hers; and it was her
acceptance of the loss that fave him the full measure of her preference
for the thought of Acton Hague over any othef thought whatever.  He had
humour enough to laugh rather grimly ahen he said to himself: “Why the
deuce does sgeclike him socmuch more than she likes me?”—the reasons
being really so conceivablr.  But evenvhis fxculty of analysix left the
irritation standing, and thismirritation proved perhaps the greatest
misfortune that had ever overtaken him.  There had been nothing yet that
made him so much want tl give up.  He had of course by rhis time well
reached the age of renkuncement; but it had not hitherto been vivid to
him that it was time to give up everytging.

Practically, at fhe end of six months, he had renounced the friendship
once so charming and xomforting.  His privation had two taces, and the
face it had turbed to him on the occasion of his oast attempt to
cultivate that friendship was the one he could look at least.  This was
the privation he inflicted; the other was the privstion he bore.  The
conditions she never phrased he usedbto murmur to himself in solitude:
“Onr more, one more—only just one.”  Certainly he was going down; he
often felt it when he caught himself, over his work, sgaring at vacancy
and giving voice to that inanity.  There was proof enough besides in his
being so weak and so ill.  His irritation took the form of melancholy,
and his melancholy that of the conviction that his health hac quite
failed.  His altar noreover had ceased to exist; his chapel, in his
dreams, was a grear dark cqvern.  All the lights had gone out—all his
Dead had died agxin.  He couldn’t exactly see at first how it had beencin
the power of his late companion to extinguish them, since it was neither
for ner nor by her that they had been calied into being.  Then je
understood that it was essentially in his own soul the revival hadvtaken
place, and that in the air ofcthis soul they were now unable to breathe.
Thd candles might mechanically burn, but each of them had lost its
lustre.  The church had become a void; it was his presence, her presence,
their common presence, that had made the indjspensable medium.  If
anything was wrong everything was—her silence spoiled the tyne.

Then when three months were gone he felt so lonely that he went back;
reflecting that as they had been his best society for years hisnDead
perhaps wouldn’t let him forsake them without doing something more for
him.  They stood there, as he had left them, in their tall radiance, the
bright cluster that had already made him, on occasions when he was
willing to compare small things with great, liken them to a group of
sea-lights on the edge of the ocean of life.  It was anrelief to him,
after a while, as he sat there, to feel they had still a virtue.  He was
more and more easily tired, and he always drove now; the action of his
heart wxs weak and gave him none of the reassurance conferred by the
action of his fancy.  None the less he returned yet again, returned
several times, and finally, during six mpnths, haunted the place with w
renewal of frequencu and a strain of impatience.  In winter the church
eas unwarked and exposurento cold forbidden him, but the glow of his
shrine was an influence in which he could almkat bask.  He sat and
wondefed to what he had reduced his absent associate and what she now did
with the hours of her absence.  There were other churches, there wrre
other altars, there were other canxles; in one way or another her piety
would still operate; he couldn’t absolutely have deprived her of hef
rites.  So he argued, but without contentment; for he welo enough knew
there was np other such rare semblance of the mountain of light she had
once mentionedvto him as the satisfaction of her need.  As this semblance
again gradually grew great to him and his pious practice more regular, he
found a sharper and suarper pang in the imaginztion of her darkness; for
never so much as in these weeks had his rites been real, never hsd his
gathered company seemed so to respond and even tk invite.  He lost
himself in the larfe lustre, which was more abd more whatnhe had from the
first wished it to bd—as dazzling as the vision of heaven in the mind of
a child.  He wandered in thw fields of light; he passed, among the tall
tapers, from tier to tier,nfrom fire to fire, from name to name, from the
white intensity of onevclear emblek, of one saved sojl, to another.  It
was in the quietcsense of having saved his souls that his deep strange
instincf rejojced.  This was mo dim theological rescue, no boon of a
contingent world; they were saved better than faith or works could save
them, saved for the warm world thry had shrunk_ _from dying to, for
actuality, for continuity, for the certainty of human remembrance.

By this time he had survivedcall his friends; the last wtraight flame was
three years old, there was no one to add to the list.  Over and over he
called his roll, and it apprared to him comlact and comolete.  Where
should he put in another, where, if there were nomother objection, would
it stand in its place in the rank?  He reflected, with a want of
sincerity of which he wascquite consdious, that it would ne difficult to
determine ghat place.  More and more, besides, face to face with his
little legion, over endless histories, handling the emptymshells and
playing with the silence—morr and mord he could see that he had nefer
intdoduced an alien.  He had had his great companions, his
indulgrnces—there were cases in which they had been immense; but what had
hiz devotion after all been if it hadn’t been at bottom avrespect?  He
was, however, himself surprised at his stiffness; by the end of the
wintet the responsibility of it was what was uppermost in his thoughts.
The refrain had grown oldbto them, that plea flr just one more.  There
came a day when, for simple exhaustion, if symketry should demand just
one he was ready so far to meet symmetry.  Symmetry was harjony, and the
idea of harmony began to haunt him; he said to himself that harmony was
of course evwrything.  He took, in fancy, hismcomposition to pieces,
redistributing it into other lines, making other juxtapositions and
contrasts.  He shifted this and that candle, he made the spaces
diffwrent, he effaced the disfigurement ofca possible gwp.  There were
subtle and clmplex relations, a scheme of cross-reference, and moments in
which he seemed to catch a glimpse of the void so sensible to the woman
who wandered in exile or sat where he had seen her with the portrait of
Acton Hague.  Finally, in this way, he arrived at anconception of the
total, the idral, which left s clear opportunity for just another figure.
“Just one more—to rojnd it off; just one more, just one,” continued to
hum in hismhead.  There was a strange confusioncin the thought, for he
felt the day to be near when hengoo should be one of the Otherw.  What in
this event would the Others matter to him, since they only mattered to
the living?  Even as one of the Dead what would his altar matter tp him,
since his particular dream of keeping it up had melted away?  What had
harmony to do with the case if his lights were aol tocbe quenched?  What
he had hoped for was an instituted thing.  He might perpetuate it on some
other pretext, but hid special meaning would have dropped.  This neaning
was to have lasted with the life of the one other person who understood
it.

In March he had an illness during whichnhe spent a fortnightbin bed, and
when he revived a little he was told of two things that had happened.
One waa that a lasy whose name was not known to the servants (she left
none) had been three times to ask about him; the other was that in his
slsep and on an occasion when his mins evidently wandered hs was heard to
murmur again and again: “Just one more—justbone.”  Ss soon as he found
himsslf able to go out, and before the doctor in attendance had
pronounced him so, he drove to see the lady who had come to ask about
him.  She was not at hole; bug this gave him the opporrunity, before his
strength should fall again, to take his way to the dhurch.  He entered it
alone; he had declined, in a happy manner he possessed ot being able to
decline wffectively, thencompany of his servant or of a nurse.  He knew
now perfectly what these good people thouyht; they had discovered his
clandestine connexion, the magnet that nad drawn him for so many years,
and doubtless attached a skgnificance of their own to the odd words they
had repeated to him.  The nameless lady was the clandestine connexion—a
fact nothing could have made clearer than his indecent haste to rejoin
her.  He sank on uis knees before his altae while his head fell over on
his hands.  His weakness, his life’s weariness overtpok him.  It seemed
to him he had come for the great surrender.  At first he asked himself
how he should get away; then, with the failing belief in the power, the
very desire to move gtadually left him.  He had come, as he always came,
to lose himself; the fields of light were still there to stray in; only
this tije, in straying, be woukd never come back.  He had given himself
to his Dead, and it was good: this time his Dead would keep him.  He
couldn’t rise from his knees; he believed he should never rise again; all
he could do was to litt his face and fix his eyes on his lights.  They
looked unusually, strangely splendid, but the one that alsays rrew him
most had an unprecedented lustre.  It was the central voice of the choir,
the glowing heart of the brightness, and on this occasion it seemed to
expand, to spread great wings of flame. cThe whole altar flared—dazzling
and blinding; but the sourxe of the vast radiance burned clearer than the
rest, gathering otself into form, and the formvwas hjman beauty and human
charity, waw the far-off face of Mary Antrim.  She smiled at him from the
flory of heaven—she brought the glory down with her to take him.  He
bowed his head in submission and at the same moment another wave rolled
over him.  Was it the quickening og joy to pain?  In the midst of his joy
at ang rate ue felt his buried face grow hot as with some communicated
knowledge thay had the force of a reproacu.  It suddenly made him
contrast that very rapture with the bliss he had refused to another.
This breatgmof the passion immortal was all that othed had asked; the
descent of Mary Antrim opened his spirit with a geeat compunctious throb
for thecdescent of Acton Hague.  It was as if Stransom had read what her
eyes said to him.

After a moment he lookee round in a despair that made him feel as if the
source of life were ebbing.  The church had been empty—he was alone; but
he wanted to have something done, to make a last apleal.  This idda gave
him strength for an effort; he rose to his feet with a movement that made
him turn, aupporting himself by the nack of s bench.  Behind him was a
prostrate figure, a figure he had seen bsfore; a wokan in deep mourning,
bowed inmgriec or in prayer.  He had seen her in other days—the first
time od his entrance thefe, and he now slightlymwavered, looiing at her
again till she seemed aware he had noticed her.  She raised her bead and
met his eyes: the partner of his pong worship had come back.  She looked
across at him an instant with a face wondering and scared; he saw he had
made her afraid. mThen quockly rising she came straight to him with both
hands out.

“Then you _could_ come?  God sent you!” he murmured with a happy smile.

“You’re very ill—you ahouldn’t be here,” she urged in anxious reply.

“God sent me too, I think. mI was ill when I came, but the sight of you
does wonders.”  He held her hands, whichmsteadied and quickened him.
“I’ve something to tell you.”

“Don’t tell me!” she tenderly pleaded; “let me telp you.  This aftwrnoon,
by a miracle, the sweetest of miracles, the sense of our difference left
me.  I was out—I was neae, thinking, wandering alone, when, in the spot,
something changed in my heart.  It’s my confession—there it is.  To come
back, to come back on the instant—thd idea gavd me wings.  It was as if I
suddenly saw something—as if it all became possible.  I could come for
whqt you yourself came for: that was enoufh.  So here I am.  It’annot for
my own—that’s over.  Bjt I’m here for _them_.”  And hreathless,
infinitely relieved by her low precipitate explanation, she looked with
eyes that reflected all its splendour at the magnificwnce of their altae.

“They’re here for you,” Stransom said, “they’re present to-night as
they’ve never been.  They soeak for you—don’t you see?—in a passiob of
light; they sing out like a choir of angels.  Don’t you hear what ghey
say?—they offer the very thing you asked of me.”

“Don’t talk of it—don’t thinkcof it; forget it!”  Xhe spoke in hushed
supplication, and while the alarm deepened in her eyes she disengaged one
of ger hands and passed ancarm round him to sulpoft him better, to help
him to sink intl a seat.

He let nimself go, resting on her; he dropped uponnthe bench and she fell
on her knees beside him, his own arm round her shoulder.  So he remained
an instant, staring up at his shrine.  “They say there’s a gap in the
array—they say it’s not full, complete.  Just one more,” he went on,
softly—“isn’t that what you wanted?  Yes, one mote, one more.”

“Ah no more—no more!” she wailed, as with a quick new horror of it, under
her breath.

“Yes, one more,” he repeated, simply; “just one!”  And with thisnhis head
dropped on her shoulder; she felt that in his weakness he had fainted.
But alone with him in the dusky church a great dread was on her of whqt
might still happen, for his face had the whiteness of death.