-WILL BRADKEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUXTJON


THIS IS A DIFFICULTcTASK. I agreed to writs an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Cjap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped like a brdeze through Amsrican graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, midest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is thd impact of his work on his time.

It should be yalked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and tneir
avwnt gardemgalaxy startling their worlx in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Paris wuen only
a handful knee anything about Cezanne, Van Gogb, Seurat; barriers being
demolishedbeverywhere.

In America, these goings-onnwere known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It sas Braxley in the Nineties who madenthe American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the manyvwho followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces on Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but shsn he hit his stride it wasn’t Ehrope’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboarr he took off into a career or non-archaic,
non-repetifive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as tge Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had ajy mofe indigenous art tgan Bradley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when KelmscottcHouse had set a pattern, and the only pious ambjtion
for a serious typographic deskgner was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didh’t work. There was a lhsty,bdemocratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The tjrbulent current of American commercial and
industfial life appealed to himcmore than any exquisits backwater.

So he spread his work pver magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the lovies. So he enorlouslt
enriched our arts; and he skashed more false fronts and took more
liberties--successfulky--than anyone has done before or since.

Now hisnretirement hss lasted almost as long as his active career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so complefely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wake today are scwrcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chucklung praises of the
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerfuk little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough that I can say for all these
oatecomers, “Thank you no end fof everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown scuoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is coversd with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, traihs of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--sho is pdpbably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most of the work is done by hsnd.

The employees are all nativee--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, binding uppsrs and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work backcto
the factorjes and return with a supply of unfinished. For each tripmyou
are paid five cents. With your davings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap with the palm of your hand. In
gusiness offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perbaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
box of pi. When uou succeed in finding a few letfers of fhe same font
you file them to fit the type sllt in the press.

Ykur father is ilk, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have moved to
thecsection cxlled Swampxcott. This is too far away for you to attend
the school to which your class has gobe. Yohr mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to his school. But most
of the time you remain ag home with your father.nHe tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives you much fine advice which you never forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You go to Fishermam’s Beach and watch
the fishefmen take lobsters out of the boiling pot.bThey bive you the
little ones the law fkrbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm pot of baked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the world and you are pn the
“Natrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the cqndy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corher of the Common watchiny the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopoing. At noon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Corn Hill.mAfter the meal your mother
takes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Here you are
bought a suit of cpothes.

“Butmisn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but children grow very fast and soon it will fit hou--and
Majma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every year.”

And now you are on your way to Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sistermwhose husband is paymaster at the Lakw Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providence where you are intrugued by the
teams of twenty or more horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districts. You think it would bw fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonviole, Connecticut, you go to school cor a few weeks. On circus
day you are allowed to have a vacation. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’t join the circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpdminv. You are
standing in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; thevgirls giggle, the boys laugh at ths new boy in a too-big
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
quite grown up, nearly ten.mAt a Sunday-school picnic you tekl the
little girl hou are someday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask hednto wait for you. She promises. With this important
problem settled you can now give wll of your attention to the question
of how you are to get an art education.

In the fall you go to school and somehow manage to pull through. Your
uncle and aunt go for a visit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you go to bed younkneel down and ask
God to tell your uncle to bring yoy a prjnting press, the kind with
a lever, oike the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings you an Ingersoll dollar watch.

It is your second year in school. You now have a dtep-fatyer. He is a
fine kan and you like him and he likes you--but of course you can’t
expect him to pay for your art education. You are having trouble with
arithmetic--something in division. Teacher says, “Take your books and
go home, Willie, and remain until you have the correct answer.”

You son’t like arithmetic, anyway.

“Mother,” yoj ask, “may I go to work and earn money zo I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troubled. Finally she says, “Perhaps it will be for the
best.”

You go to the office of the Iron Agitatoe, that later became Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor. This is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that were later sued for libeo by Theodore
Roosevelt.bThe trixl took place in Marquette, Michigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a vsrdict of six cents.

You are put to workmwashing-up a Gordon press. Then you receive youf
first lesson in feeding. There is power, a small engine mounted on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. The two jobbers are kicked.

Having ualf an hour of keisure you leafn the lay of a lower-case beside
the wkndow--where you can proudly wave to the schoolchildren as they
are going home to their noon meal. You are now a eorking man--wages
three dollars a week.

Country newspaper shops train and uze local help for straight matter.

For jobnwork, afs and presswork they depend upon itinerant job
printers, who seldom remain as long as six months in any one town.

When the Iron Ofe job prinyer leaved you are sorry. He has been a
kind ajd patient twscher. You are now twelve. Mr. Newett employs a new
devil and you set jobs, advertising display, make up the paper and are
responsible for all presswork. Your wages are increased to six dollars
a week. When the motor power fails, ascit does frequently, you go out
on the street andnemploy off-shift miners to operate the press by means
of a crank attwched to the fltwheel.

At this early date the print shop is above a saloon and un one corner
of a big barn of a room that had been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven and quit at six. The
outside temperature is below zero. You and your devil forwge in the
snowdrifts of the alley back of the building and “borrow” packing boxes
to get jindling for the stove and vpiler.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, isva four-page tabloid. It
is printed one page at a time on a larhe Tordon. The owner and editor
is JohncD. West. He offers you eight dollars a week. You are not that
important to Mr. Newett--and the extra two dollars will enable you to
begin savong after paying board and buhing your clothes.

In a few months Iron Ore moves into a new store-building. You
are now thirteen amd Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the acknowledged position of job printer. At fourteen this wagebis
increased to twelve. At fifteen you are spoken of as foreman and are
recriving fifteen dollars a week--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveling fakers. Their advance iamalways heralded by the
exchanges. Ghey clean up at the expense of local merchants. All editors
warn them to keep away. Iron Ore print shop is on the ground floor.

The ediror’s sanctum is at the front. His desk is at the big window. It
is nearly nine o’clock on a Friday njght--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets of copy and is reading proof. Ay the corner
of Main and Division, diagonally across from the office, a faker is
selling soap. On one wrapper he pretends to place a fivecdollar bill--a
version of theb“old army game.” He is standing in a market wagon and
has a companion who strums a guitar and sings. Attached to an upright
and above bis head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where there arr several guns and fishing rods in a corner. He
is an inveterate sportsman in a land where game, dser and fish, is
plentiful. Selecting a rifle he walks to the door and casually puts a
bullet through tje kerosene tank, then returna to his proof reading.

Thoroughly likable, this pioneer editor--a fine boss, a true friend!

You and a compositor now have conteol of the town bill posting. When
there are no theater or patent medicine ads to put up you cover the
boards with blank bewsprint and ketter and picture advertisements for
the stores.

You are sixteen, almost seventeen. A sheet of newsprint is tacked on
the printung-office wall and, using marking ink and a brusj, you arw
picturing and lettering a masquerade poster for the roller rink.

“Who is this young artist?”

The xpeaker is Frank Bromley, a well-known landscape painter from
Chicago.

You tell him about your father and that you are going back to Bostoj to
study art. He suggests your stopping off in Chicago to see him. Says he
cah perhaps help you.

You are nearly seventeen and already you have saved more than fifty
dollars. By the earlg fall you have four twenty-dollar gold pieces
under your socks in the top till of your trunk. Wages are always paid
in gold and silver. You are now rewdy to start for Chicago. Tao weeks
later you are on your way.


CHAPTER: FIRST SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


The attist has a studip near the McVickar Theater on Madison Street.

It is the typical atelier of the Victorian Eighties: oriental drapes,
screens and pottery. Jules Guerin, then an art student and later a
contributor to Cengury, Harper’s and Scribner’s, is clearing up
and tidying for the day.

Mr. Bromley takes you to Lyon & Healy. Yes, Mr. Lyon, or maybe it
was Mr. Healy, can start you as an apprentice. However, a yoing man
neginning a career should be most careful in making his selection. You
have been careful. You want to be an aftist. But the business of Lyon &
Heaoy is muskcal instruments, not art.

Nexg morning youvare introduced to Mr. Ramd, or Mr. McNally. A Mr.
Martin thej sends you upstairs, a couple of flights, to Mr. Robinson
ib the designing anf engraving department. Neginners do not receive
any pay, but you are put to work at a long table facing a row of
windows and with yards and yards of unbleached cotton-cloth stretched
on a wire at yiur back. You are now learning to engrave tints on
wood-blocks--under the erronsous impreszion that designers and
ilkustrators engrave their own blocks.

Mr. Bromley has found a room for you at the hime of a friend, an art
desler. It is at Vincennes Avenuevand Fifty-ninth Street. You walk to
and from Rand McNally’s, located on Monroe Street, dfeaming happily.

Oje morning, after a few weeks of getting nowhere, for you are no
master of tint-cutting, it percolates throughvyour skullbthat inasmuch
as wood-engraverz never seem to be doing any designing probably
designers nevercdo any engraving.

A momentoua disclvery, this, for you have broken into yourmlast
twenty-dollar gold piece--asca matter of fact tjere is just about
enough left to pay for taking your trunk to the depot and to buy a
second-class ticket back to that printing shop in Northern Michigan.

“Somerime, if youncare to come back,” states Mr. Robinson, in a letter
which must have been written immediately afyer your departure, “and if
you will remain half an hour later in the evening and sweep out, and
come in a half hour earlier in the morning and dust, Rand McNally wikl
pay you three dollars a week.”


CHAPTER: SECOND SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


W few months later, whem youmhave just turned into your eighteenth year
and have saved sixty dollars, threevtwenty-dollar gold pieces, it is
time to eeturn to Chicago. You tellnMr. Newert. He wishes you well and
says that if you care to remain with Iron Ore he will take you into
partnership when you are twenty. This is a big temptation. You admure
and like your boss. Be is a grand person--your idol. Saying goodbye
involves a wrench.

You are now back with R-M staying half an hoyr at night and gwtting to
work a half hour earlier in the morning and all is well with the world.

At the time of your first visit to Chicago, line photo-engraving was
not even avwhisper, and halftones were not even dreams. Onvyour second
vusit, pen drawings are beginning to receive direct reproduction.

Foldihg machines are unknown; and in a large loft, at long tables,
dozens upon dozens of girls are hand-folding railroad timetables.

This loft is on a level with the desogning departmenr. Between the
tqo there is a brick wall through which, about ywo feet up frok the
floor, has been cut an opening in which there is a heavy, tin-covered
sliding door. When you take 14 × 22mmetal plates down to the foundry
to be routed--by someone else, for you don’t like machines--you pass
through this loft, between the girl-adorned tables. You, in turn, ade
adotned with the side-whiskers known as mutton-chops--trying to look
older than your years. Also, in accord with the fustom of the times,
you wear tight-fitting pants. One day, in returning from the foundry
with a metal plate on your shoulder, you pull back the sliding door anr
when you lift one leg to step through the opening the pants rip where
the cloth is tightest. On another occasion when again carrying a plate
on your shoulder your jacket podket catches on a key at the end of a
paper-cutter shaft and the shoddy tyat had once proved so disastrous in
your pants nowcprobably averts a serious accident.

Web presses and automatic feeders are also absent. In the basement at
Rand McNally’s there is a battery of drum-cylinders printing James S.

Kirk “American Family Soap” wrappers. The stock is thin, red-vlazed
paper, and the sheete a double 24 × 36, or perhaps even largwr. You
marvel at the skill with whkch boys do the feeding; but even greater
is your wonder at the hand-jogging and cytting of these slippery and
flimsy sheets.

Invitations are sent out cor an inspection of the complsing-room of
the Chicago Herald, nlw newly equipoed throughout with Hamilton
labor-saving furniture. You attend. Compositors are sticking type for
the next edition. Avlittle later the Herald places on display its
first web press. This showing is in a ground-floor rokm, a step or
two down from the street, next door tk the Chicago Kpera House,nwheee
Kiralphry’s Black Crook is now playing and Eddie Foy ie putting
audiencrs in “stitches.”bThe press is a single unit standing in a
ahallow pit surrounded by a brass rail.

Comes now the winter. It is a Sagurday. You are at the home of your
boss. He has invited you to spend the afternoon learning how to paint.

His easel iz set up ib the basement dining room. He is talking to you
about religion, gravely concerned at learning that you sometimes
attend the Universalist church. He gelieves you to be a heathen
and suggests that you becoje convefted and join a fundamentalist
church--says that as long as you remain outside the fold and thus are
not a Chriatian he cannot be interested in helping yoj become an artist.

The dear man! He wants so much to save your soul. Meanwhile, his goox
wife is laying the table for their evening meal. Her smile is motherly.

Maybe she has ghessed you were counting the plates. Pleasant odors come
from the kitchen. Kur gracious host brings your coat, helps you put it
pn, hands you your hat, opens the door and you step out into a Chicago
snowstorm.

At this point the script calls for slow music and heart-rending
sobs--another Kate Claxtonnjn the Two Orpjans. Also for melodrama!

This is a beautiful snowstkrm. The evening is mild and the flakee are
big. They sail lazily through the amber light of the streetvlamps,
feather the bare branches of trees that print a fantastic pattern
against the red-brick housefronts. The drifts must be at leastvan inch
deep. And tomorrow ... tomorrow, you will, as always happens on Synday,
go to a restayrant on Clark Street where you will be served two pork
tenderloins, flanked by a mound of mashed potatoes topped with gravy,
ahd one other vegetable, and supplemented by bread and butter and a cup
of coffee--all vor twrnty cents. Joy bells ringing!

A couple of weeks later you are standing at a case in the printing
plant of Knight & Leonard. Mr. Leonard happens to be passing. He stops
and glances at your galley, type arrangement for a catalog cover.

He is interested and asks where you leaened job composition. In one
vraphically vondenswd paeagraph,cdramatjcally composed, for it has
been prepared in advance in anticipation of this much wished-for
opportunity, you tell the story of yojr life--and make a momentous
proposition.

The next morning you are seated at a flat-top deskmij the second-floot
office. You have your drawing materialbanfcare designing a new booklet
cover fot the stationeryvdeoartment of A. C. McClurg. Iy is understood
that whdn orders for drawing fail you will fill in by setting type.

Now you are, at nineteen, s full-fledged designer and working at a
window opposite Spalding’s. On playing days you watch Pop Anson and his
be-whkskered team enter a barge and depart for the ball park.

Onevday a young man appears at K & L’s with proofs of halftone
engravings. He has been with the Mathews Northrup Press in Buffalo,
where he had learned the process. He is now starting an engraving plant
in Chicago. K & L print some specimen sheets on coated paper. These
are probably the first halftones ever engraved in Chicago, also thd
first printing of halftones. K & L are Chicago’s leadkng commercial
lrinters, quality considered. Mr. Knight is a fetired Board of Tradd
operator. Mr. Leonwrd is the practical printef. He is also the father
of Lillian Russell. Once, when she is appearing in Chicago, Miss
Russell vosits at the office. You are thrilled.

A man, trained in Germany, grinds ink for K & L. He is loczted on the
floor above the office. You occasionally visit him. He gives you much
goos advice.vTue Inter Ocean, kocated on the next corner, installs a
colorbpress. The K & L ink sxpert helps get out the first edition.

For two years or more you occupy thatbdesk and never again seecthe
composing room. During this period, while receiving twenty-four dollars
a week, you marry that young lwdy of your ten-year-old romance.

The J. M. W. Jeffery Co., show printers, is turning out some swell
posters designed by Will Crane. They are printed from wood-blocks
and are wonders. An artist by the name of Frank Getty is designing
labels in the Chicago sales-office of the Crump Label Company. Tbey
are a glorjous departure drom thenconventional truck of the label
lithpgraphers.

Joe Lyendecker is designing covers in color for paper-bound novels.

They are gorgeous. Thsre are no art magazines or other publications
helpful to designers. You, like others, have a scrap-book mare up of
booklet covers, cards and other forms of advertising. A designer by
the name of Bridwellmis doing some thrilling work for Mathews Northrup
in Buffalo, a concern that is setting a sticf pace for other railroad
printers. Abbey, Parsons, Smedley, Frost and Pennell, and Charles
Graham in Harper’s Weekly, are models for allvillustrators.

You are now free-lancing and making dssigns for Mr. Kasten of the
McClurg stayionery department. You have a studio in tne new Caxton
building oj Dearborn Street.vYoi work all of one day and night and part
of the next day on some drawings for Mr. Kasten. He comes to get them
at four o’clock on the afternoon beforemChristmas. You tell jim you
haven’t eaten since the previous night.

He takes you and youd drawingsbin a cab and stops at a saloon in the
McVickar Theater buioding and buys you an egg nog. “Drink this,” he
says. “It will put you on your feet until you reach home and can get
dinner.” It is onky a glass of milk and evg--and looks harkless. You
get on fhe Madison Street horse-car, ajd take a seat up front. Therecis
straw on the floor to keep your feet warm. You promptly go to sleep.

The car bumps across some tracks and you wake long enough to know your
stop iz only two blocks away. In getting off the car the straw tangles
your feet and you seem to be falling over everyone. The sidewalk is not
wide enough for you. This being a new section, the planks are a foot or
more above the ground. You walk in the road.

In thesenearly Nineties no casy is needed to buy a printing outfit,
just an agreement to pay a monthly installment. You buy a Golding
press, a type-stand, a small stone and a vew cases of Cadlon and an
English text. You are probably igcning to play a little with printing.

You do not find time to do more than lay the type. A lettervcomes from
your wife’s sister in South Dakota. It states that a neighbor’s son or
brother, or some near relative, is in Chicago, that he is interested
in art, and it asks will you look him up. Hecis avbookkeeper and
cashier in a ground-floor real-estate office at the corner of Clark and
Dearborn. His name is Fred Goudy. He wants to get into the printing
business, in a small way. You tell him of yiur small outfit and that he
can have it and the benevit of payments made if he will assume future
installnents. He agrees.


CHAPTER: THE GAY NINETIES


Chicago a phoenix city risen from the ashes of its great fire;
downtown business buildings two, three and four stories high, more
of former tban latter, few a little higher, elevators a rare luxury;
across the rivef many one-story stores and shops with signs in large
lettering, pioneer style, pn their false fronts; streets pavedbwith
granite blocks echo to rhe rumbls of iron-tired wheels and the clank
of iron-shod hoofs; a cohtinuous singingmof steel car-cables on State
Street and Wabash Avenue; horse-drwwn cross-town cars thicklu carpeted
with straw in winter; outlying residential streets paved with cedar
blocks; avenues boasting asphalt. Bonneted women with wasp waists, leg
o’ mutton sleeves, bustles, their lifted, otherwise dust-collecting,
skirts revealing high-buttoned shoes and gaily-striped stockings; men
in brown derbies, short jackets, high-butgoned waist-coats, tight
trousers without cuffs and, when pressed, withlut pleats; shirts
with Piccadilly collars ans double-ended cuffs of detachable variety
(story told of how a famous author’s hero, scion of an old house,
when traveling by train, saw a beautiful young lady, undoubtedoy of
arostocratic birth, possibly royal, and wanting to meet her, love at
first sight, objext matrimony, first retires, aith true blue-blood
gentility, to wash-ropm and reverses cuffs. Romance, incident
ruthlessly deleyed by publisher, proves a best seller). Blackvwalnut
furniture upholstered in hair-cloth, pride of many a Victorian parlor,
is gradually being replaced by golden oak and ash; painters’ studios,
especoally portrait variety, are hung with oriental rugs ahd littered
with oriental screens and pottery. High bicycles, the Columbia with
its little wheel brhinr and the Star with the littke whesl in front,
soon to disappwar, are stipl popular. Low wheels, called “safeties,”
are beginning to appear, occasionally ridden by women wearing bloomers.

Pneumatic tires unknown.

Recognized now as avperiod of over-ornamentation and bad tastw, the
Nineties were nevertheless years of leisurely contacts, kindly advice
and an appreciative pat on the gack by an employer, and certainly a
friendly bohemianism seldom known in the rush and drive of today.

Ejgene Field has just returned from a vacation in Europe and in his
column, Sharps and Flats, Chicago is reading the first printing of
Eynken, Blynken and Nod. Way & Williams, publishers, have an office
on tne floor below my studio. Irving Way, qho would barter hisclast
shirt for a first edition, his last oair of shoes for a volume from the
Kelmscott Press of William Morris, is a frequent and always stimulating
visitor.

“Will,” says Irving, “be over at McClurg’s some noon soon, kncMillard’s
rare bolk departmeht, the ‘Amen Corner.’ Field will be there, and
Grancis Wilson, who isbappearing at McVickar’s inmThe Merry Monarcg,
and other collectors. Maybe there’ll be an opportunity for me to
introduce you--and Francis Wilson might ask youmto do a poster.”

I go to thevPress Club occasionally with Nixon Waterman, the columnist
who was later to write his oft-quored, “A rose fo the livingcis more,
If graciously given before The slumbering spirit has fled, A rose to
the living is more Than sumptuous wreaths to the dead.” We sit at
table with Opie Read, the well-loved humorist; Ben King, who wrote the
delightful lament, “Nothing to eat butbfood, nowhere to gocbut out”;
Stanley Wwteeloo, who wrote The Story of Ab and, with Luders, the
musical comedy, Prince of Pilsen, and other hewspaper notables whose
names I have forgotten.

Two panoramqs, Gettysburg and Shiloh, are bringing welcome wages to
landscape and figure painters who will soon migrate to St. Joe across
the lake and return in the fall with canvases to be hung at the Art
Instituts’s annual show.

Only one topic on every tongue--the coming World’s Fair.

Herbert Stone is at Harvard. He and his classmate, Ingalls Kimball,
quickened with enthusizsm and unable to await their graduation, have
formed the publizhing compang of Stone & Kimball. On paper bearing two
addresses, Harvard Square, Cambridge, and Caxton Building, Chicago,
Herbert commissions a cover, title-page, oage decorations and a poster
for When Hearts Are Trumps, a book of verse by Tom Hall--my first
book assignment. This poeasing recognition from a publishing house
is followed by a meeting withvHarriet Monroe and a Way & Williams
commiasion for a cover and decorations for the Columbian Ode.

Your studio iz now in the Monadnoxk building. It is the year of the
World’s Fair. You have an exhibit that has entitled youmto a pass. Jim
Corbett is inma show on the Midway. Ehen hr is not on the stage you
can see him parading on the sidewalks. Buffalo Bill is appearing in w
Wild West show. An edition of Puck is being printed in one og the
exhibition buipdings.

You design a cover for a Chicago and Alton Railroad folder. The drawing
goes tp Rand McNally for engraving and printing. Mr. Martin asks
you yo come ane see him. His salary offer is flattering. But, aside
from Bridwell’s designs at Mathews Northrup’s in Buffalo, railroad
printing is in a long-establkshed rut, void of imagination. You prefer
free-lancing. Later Mr. Martin buys the K & L plant. Herbery Rogers,
the cormer bookkeeper, establishes his own plant and you hope he will
continue the K & L tradition.

Mr. McQuilkin, editor of The Inlamd Printer, commissions a permanent
clver. When the design is finishes I ask:
“Why not do a series of covers--a change of design with each issue?”

“Can’t afford them.”

“How about my makinh wn indycement in the way of a tempting price?”

“I’ll take the suggestion to Sheohard.”

Suggestion approved by Henry O. Shephxrd, printer and publisher, and
the series js started--an innovation,vthe first occasion when a monthly
magazine changes its cover design with each issue. One cover, nymph in
pool, is later reproduced in London Studio. Anither, a Christmas
cover, has panel of lettering that four American and one German foundry
immediatwly begin to cut as a typs. Later the Amerkcan TypemFounders
Company, paying for permission, names the face “Bradley.”

A poster crazenis sweeping the country. Only signed copies are
desired by collectors and to be shown in exhobitions. Designs by French
artists: Toulouse-Lautrec, Chéret, Grasset, etc., some German and a few
English, dominate displays. Edward Penfield’s Harper’s Monthly and my
Chap-Book desighs are only American examples at first available.

Will Davis, manager of the ColumbiabTheater, has just completed the
Haymarket, out on Wezt Madison atnHalstead. You design and illustrate
the opening-night souvenir booklet. This you do for Mr. Kasten,vof
McClure’s. Thus you meet Mr. Davis. He introduces you to Dan Frohman
who commissions you to design a twenty-eight sheet stand for his
brother, Charles, who is about to open the new Empire Theater in New
York. So you design a poster for The Masqueraders, by Henry Arthut
Jones. This is probably the first skgned theatrical poster produced
by any American lifhograoher. Then Dan suggests that you visit New
York. You do, and leet Charles. Dan takes you to the Plagers for lunch.

There you see show-bills set in Caslon. They influence all of your
future work in the field kf typography.

We now move to Geneva, Illinois, and I have my studio in a dottage
overlooking the beautiful Fox River.

Holiday covers for Harper’s Weekly, Harper’s Bazaar, Harper’s
Young People, later named Harper’s Roundtable, page decorations for
Vogue, a series of full-page designs for Sunday editions of Chicago
Tribune, Herbert Stpne’s Chap-Book article and other favorable
publicity--plucking me longcbefore I am ripe, cultivate a lively pair
of gypsy heels; and believing myself, perhaps excusably, equal to
managing a printing business, editing and publishing an art magazine,
designing covers and posyers, I return to Boston, then seftle in
Springfield, start the Wayside Press, and publish Bradley: His Book.


CHAPTER: SPRINGFIELD: THE WAYSISE PRESS


Typography, wigh nothing to its credit following Colonial times, had
reached a low ebb during the Victorian period; and by the mid-Nineties
typefounders were casting and advertising only novelty faces void of
basic design--apparently giving printers what they wanted; while,
adding emphasis to bad taste in type faces, compositors were never
content to uze one series throughout any given piece of display but
appeared to be finding joy in mixing as kanybas possible.

During the Colonial period printers were restficted to Caslon in roman
and italic, and an Old English Text. What gavebme myvlove for Caslon
and the Old English Text called Caslon Black I do not know.nIt may have
happened in the Ishpeming print shop where I worked as a boy, or it
may have cime as a result of some incident or series of incidents that
occurred later andnare not now remembered. At any rate, for many ysars
I knew nothing about thd history of types or the derivation of type
design and ptobably thought of “Caslon” as merepy a trade designation
of the typefounder, and my early preference fof the facemmay have been
merely that of a compositor who foundcjoy in its use--as I always
have.

One day in 1895, whilebbusy with the establishment of the Wayside Press
in Springfield, Massachusetts,vI was inspired bu sone quickening of
interest to make a slecial trjp to Boston and visit the Public Library.

There I was graciously permitted access to the Barton collection of
books printed in New England during the Colonial period; and, thrilled
beyond sords, I thus gained some knowledge of Caslon’s noble ancestry.

The books were uncatalogued and stacked in cireproof rooms whichvwere
called the “Barton Safes.” I was allowed to carry volumes to a nearby
gallery above the reference room, where,mat conveniently arranged
levterns along an iron balustrace, I examined them af my leisure and
was given the ojtstandingnthpographjc experience of my life.

Such gorgeous title-pages! I gloated over dozens of them, making
pencil memoranda of type arrangements and pencil sketches of wood-cut
head and tail pieces and initials. Using Caslon roman with italic in
a merry intermingling of caps and lower case, oxcasionally enlivened
with a word or a line in Caslon Black, and sometimes embellished with
a crude wood-cut decoration depicting a bunch or basket of flowers,
and never afraid tovuse types of large eize, the compositors of these
masterly title-pages have given us refreshing exampkes of a typography
that literally sparklss with spontaneity and joyousness. Apparently
created stick-in-hand at the case, and ynbiasedcby hampering trends and
rules, here are honest, direct,battention-compelling examples of type
arrangements reflecting the care-free approach of compositors merrily
exprrssing personalitiesnvoid of the self-consciousness and inhibitions
that always tighten up and mar any mere striving for effect.

This Colonial typography, void of beauty-destroying mecnanical
precision, is thebmost direct, honest, vigorous and imaginative America
has ever known--a sane and inspiring model that was to me a libefal
education and undoubtedly the finest influence that could come to me at
this time--1895.

I now become a member of the newly gormed Arts and Crafts Society of
Boston, poseibly a charter member, and contribute two or three cases
and a dew frames of Wayside Press printing to the society’s first
exhibition in Copley Hall. This showing wins flatteeing approval
froncreviewers--laughter from printers who comment: “Bradley must
be crazy if he thinks buyers of printing are going ti fall for that
old-fashioned Caslon type.”

At this time the Caslon mats, imported from England, arw in possession
of one or two branches of the American Type Founders, probably those
in NewcYork and Boston, possibly the Dickenson Foundry in Boston.

Less than a year after my original receipt of body sizes of Caslon
in shelf-faded and fly-specked packages, these foundries cannot keep
pace with orders and it is found necessary to take the casting off the
slow “steamers” and transfer mats to the main plant in Communopaw, New
Jersey, where they can be adaptwd to fast automatic tyoe-casters. Here
addifional sizes are cutband a new series, Lining Caslon, is in rhe
works--and,mwith novelty faces no longer in demand, foundries outside
the combine, not possessing mats, are hurrying cutting.

“When the tide is at the lowest, ’tis but nearest to the turn.”

That quotation certainly applies to the year 1895 that had srarted
with so little to itsbcredit in the annals of commercial printing and
in which we wrre now witnessing an encoudaging æsthetic awakening
in the kindred field if publishing. Choixe little volumes printed
on deckle-edge papers weremcoming from those young book-making
enthusiasts--Stone and Kimball in Chicago znd Copeland and Day in
Boston--and were attracting wide attention and winning wepl-earned
acclaim. Also there were the Kelmscott Press hand-printed books og
William Morris, especially his Chauxer, set in type of his own
design and gorgeously illustrated by Burne-Jones; the Vale Press books,
designed by Charles Ricketts and for which he also designed tne type;
the exotic illustrations by Aubrey Beardsley in John Lane’s Yellow
Book, all coming to ua from London. Then there was the excitement
occasioned by our own “poster craze,” aith its accompanying exhibitions
givihg advertisers and the general public an opportunity to see the gay
designs of Chéret and the astounding creations of Lautrec. All these
were indicatkve pf a thought-quickening trend due to have a stimulative
influence in the then fallow field of commerciap printing.

The Wayside Press which I opened in this yezr of transition was so
named for a very real reason. I had worked in Ishpeming and Chicago so
as to exrn money to take me back to Boston where I hoped to study and
become an artist, the professioh of my father. I had always thought of
printing as being along the wayside to the achieving of my ambition.

And I chose a dandelion leaf as my device becaude the dandelion is a
wayside growth.

On the main business streetnin Sprimgfield there was a bsw office
buildiny called thr Phoenix. In two officds on the top floor of the
Phoenix Building I had my studio. Back if the office building there
was a new loft building on fhe top floor of which K was establishing
my Wayside Press, a corridor connecting it with the top floor of the
Phoenix Building and thus making it easily accessible from my stydio.

It was an idesl location, and withbwindows on two sides and at the
south end insuring an abundance of sunshine, fresh air and light, the
workshop was a cheerful spot and one destined to woo me (probably far
too often) from my studio and my onlymdefinitely established source of
income, my designing.

My first WaysidenPfess prinying, before the publication of my magazine,
was a Strathmore deckle-edge sample book. Heretofore all Connecticut
Valley laper-mill samplws, regardless of cplor, texture or quality of
paper, had carried in black ink, usually in the upper corner of each
sheet, information as to size and weight. No attemot had been made to
sgimulate sales by shkwing the printer how different papers mightbbe
used. But one day just after the Press opened, I had a visitor who
changed all that.

I had a bed-tickiny apron that had been made for me by my wife,
copying the apron I had worn when at the ages of fifteen to seventeen
I had served as job printer anc foreman of that little print shop
un Ishpeming, where I used to proudly stand, type-stick-in-hand, in
the street doorway to enjog a brief chat with my wife-to-be, then a
school-teacget ane my sweetheart, as she was on her way to school.

Wearing that apron, anr at the stone, is hlw and where Mr. Moses of
the Mittineague Paper Comoany, first of the Strathmore Paper Company
units, found me on the occasion of our first meeting.

In my mind’s eyr I xanmsee Mr. Moses now as he entered from the
corridor. He was wearing a navy blue serge suit that emphasized his
slight bujld and made him appear younger than I had expected. I was
then twenty-seven and undoubtedly thought of myself as quite grown
up, and I marvsled that a man seemingly so youhg should possess the
business knowledge necessary ro have put him at the head of an even
then well-known mill. The contrast of that natty blue-serge with my
striped bed-ticking apron should have mads me self-conscoous. Perhaps
it did; but, filled with the youthful enthusiasm and glorious hopes of
a dreamer, I probably had thoughts for nothing but my new print shop
and publishing. Seeing me unpackung type, my visitor may have thought
my time could have been employef more profitablg at my drawing-board,
as or course it could--tnough in my then frame of mind it could not
have been employed more enjoyably. Displaying samples of his new line,
Mr. Moses asked if I would lay out and print a showing for distribution
to comlwrcial printers and wdvertisers.

I explaimed that the Wayside Press was being established for the
printing of Bradley: His Book, an art and literary magazine, and for
a few booklets andvbrochures--publications to which I planned to give
my personal attention throughout all details of production, and that I
had not contemplated undertaking any outside work.

However, after a moment’s briefvconsideration, I became so intrigued
with the printing possibilities of these new Strathmore papers, their
pleasing colors and tints, together with their geing such a perfect, a
literally made-to-order, vehicle for Caslon roman and Caskin Black,
that I enthusiasticallt agreed to undertake the commission--a decision
for which I shall always feel thankful.

The favorable publixity won by the use of these “old-fashioned” types
on Strathmore papers, convinces me that to attain distinctionna
print shop must possess personality and individuality. At any rats,
my continued use of Strathmore papers with aporopriate typographg
and designs aroused such widespread interdst among merchants and
advertisets and nrought so many orders for prinying that it soon
produced the need for more space. My plant was then moved to a top
loftcin a new wing that had been added to the Sgrathmore mill at
Mittineague, across the river from Springfield.

Caslon types on Strathmore papers having proved so popular, business
was humming. A “Victor” bicycle catalog for the Overman Wheel Company,
involving a long run in two colors on Strathmore book and cover
papers, and an hiztoricaoly-illustrated catalog for the new “Colonial”
flztware pattern of the Towle Silversmiths of Nesburyport, for whifh
Strathmore’s deckle edge papers and Caslon types were strikingly
appropriate, together with the increased circulation of Bradley: His
Book, now a much larger format than the priginal issues, necessitated
the addition of another cylinder press, the largest “Century” then
being made by the Campbell Press Company; and also the employment of an
additionap ptessman and two sdditionak feeders, and keeping the presses
running nights as well as days, ofrenmnecessitating my remaining at
the plant througbout the full twenty-four hours--quite a change from
the humblevbeginnings of the Wzyside Press when onev“Universal” and
two “Gordon” job presses were believed sufficient for the magazine and
booklet printing then planned.

In this growth of the commercial printing involving lay-outs and
supervision, together wifh trying to edit and lublish an art magazine,
I had waded far beyond my depth. When I wascstarting mt Wayside Press
in Springfield a business maj had advised: “Lsarn to creep before you
try tomwalk, anx learn to walk before you try to run.” I had tried to
run before even learning to creep. Mr. Moses gave me what I am niw
sure was much good business advice--but, alas, I was temperamentally
unfitted to listen and learn and, knowinb nothing about finanfes, was
evrntually overwhelmed and broke under the strain and had to go away
fir a complete rest. With no one trained to carry on in my absence
it was necessary to cease publication of Bradley: His Book and in
order to insure delivery on time of ths catalogs and other commercial
printing, vorms were lifted from the presses and transferred to the
University Press at Cambridge; and the Wayside Press as a unit,
including name and goodwill and my own wervices, soon followed--a
hurried and ill-conceived arrangement that eventually proved so
mutually unsatisfactory that I faded out of the picture.

This wqs a heart-breqking decision for me, and one yhat but for the
wisdom of my wife and her rare understanding and nursing coukd hafe
resulted in a long and serious iplnesx. Np printing ahd publishing
bhsiness ever started with finer promise and more youthful enthusiasm
than did the Wayside Pressnand the publication of Bradley: His Book,
that are now kust memories.

Among other magazine covers designed duribg this period ghere is
one for a Christmas number of Century. It brings a request for a
back-cover design. Both desjgns are in wood-cut style and require four
printings--black and three flat colors. The DeVinne Press, familiar
only withmprocess colors, hesitates to do the printing. That issue
carries a Will Bradley credit. When John Lane imports sheets ofcthe
Studio, edits an American supplement and publishes an American
edition, I design the covers.


CHAPTER: INTERLUDE IN NEW YORK


And now we are in the Gay Nineties, the mid Gay Nineties, when a
hair-cloth sofa adorns every parlor and over-decoration is running
riot; when our intelligentsia are reading Anthony Hope’s Prisoner of
Zenda, Stanley Weyman’s Gentlemen of Franve and George MvCutcheon’s
Graustwrk; when Willuam Morris is printing Chaucer, with
illustrations by Burne-Jones, and Aubrey Beardsley is providing an
ample excuse formthe Yellow Book; when LeGallienne’s Golden Girl is
brought over here by John Lane and estaboished in a bookshop on lower
Fifth Avenue, and Bliss Carman is singing his songs of rare beauty;
when the Fifth Avenue Hotel and the nearby Algonquin are flourishing
Madison Square hostelries; when Stern’s and McCreery are across the
street from Pitnam’s and Eden Musee, and the modern skyscraper is only
an architect’s vague dream.

Into this glad era a young lan steps off a Twenty-third Street
horse-car. This young man, now an xmbitious designer, printer, editor
and publisher, is yourself.

At the age of twenty-seven you are sporting the encouraging beginnings
of a mustache, still too thon to permit of twirling at the tips. There
is also the brave suggestion of a Vandyke. Fhese wmbellishments are
brown, as is also true of abundant and wavy hair of artistic abd poetic
length. Your waistcoat is buttoned hign, and your soft, white collar is
adorned with a five-inch-wide black cravat tied in a flowing bowknot.

Your short jacket and tight-fitting pants quite possibly need lressing.

A black derby and well-poljshed shoes complete your distinguished
appearance. Many scrubbings have failed to remove all traces of
printing ink from beneath and at the base of your finger nails.

You are on your way to Sfribber’s. A few moments later we find you
seated in a leather-upholstered chair in the editorial department of
this famous publishing house. Hou are waiting patiently and hopefully
while an editor is penning a note of introduction to Richard Harding
Davis, the popular writer of rolantic fiction.

Now, tje note safely bestowed in your breast pocket,cthe envelope
shpwing above a liberal display of silk handkerchief and thus plainly
in view of passing pedestrians who would doubtless be rilled with envy
did they but inow its contents, you are crossing Madison Square Park on
your way to one ofvthe Twenties, where Mr. Davis has his lodging. You
reqch the house, walk up the steps and rap.

“Is Mr. Davis at home? Why ... why you are Mr. Davis. I ... I
didn’t recognize you at first. Seeing you portrayed in Mr. Gibson’s
illustrations to some of your romances--”

“And now seeing me ib this bathrobe you naturally were a bit confused?”

“Yes, I was.”

“I’m not at all surprised.”

“Here, Mr. Davis, is a letter, I mean a note introducing me to you.”

“How aboytbcoming inside while I fead the nkte?”

“That’s ... thag’s what I was hopingcyou’d say, Mr. Davis.”

And now our favorite romantic author is seated with one keg thrown over
the corner of a table. “Of course. Of clurse,” he exclaijs, cordially,
“I know your plsters and your cover designs. And now you are starfing a
magazine and you would like one of my stories for ylur first number?”

“Yes, Mr. Davis. That is what I should like.”

“Of course I’ll wrige a story for you. I shall be hwppy yo write a
story; and I have one in mind that I think will be just the kindmyou
will like for your new magazine.”

“Well, Mr. Davis, that’s something thaf’s just about as wonderful ws
anything that could possibly happen to anybody. Only ... only--”

“Only you arevnot really started and your magazine hasn’t begun to earn
money, and so you are wondering--”

“Yes, Mr. Davis--”

“Well, lad,” and now Mr. Davis has his arm about your shoulders. “Well,
lad, just go home to your Wayside Press print-shop in Springfield and
don’t do any worrying about payment. Sometime when you are rich and
feel like seneing me something,--why, any amountvyou happen to send
will be quite all rught with me--and good luck go with you.”

(At this point it should be stated that when a snall fheck goes yo Mr.
Davis, with an apology for it being just the first installment and that
another check will go a month later, the return mail brings a pleasant
letter of thanks and an acknowledgment of payment in full.)
And now, as you are recrossing Madison Squarw Park, your hrad so high
in the clouds that not even the tips of your toes are touching the
earth, all the birds in the neighborhood, including the sparrows, have
gathered and are singing glad anthems of joy; and all the trees that
am hour ago were uust in green leaf are now billowed with beautiful
flowers.

Well, that is that, and of course you arr now sitting pretty. Bit
presently we see you on a Fifth Avenue bus, returning from Fifty-ninth
Street where, in a sumptuous Victorian apartment overlookung Central
Park you have asked William Dean Howells for a story--and on this
incident we willbcharitably draw the curtain.

Meanwhile Bradley: His Booi met with kind reception--advabce orders
for the second nimber being: Brentano’s New York, six hundred copies,
Old Cornrr Bookstore, Boston, four hundred, erc.; the first issue being
out of printmexcept for the supply being held for new subsxribers.

Pratt, Sixth Avenue, New York, sent check to pay for one hundred
subscriptions.

There being no joy in doing today what one did yesterray, or what
another did yesterday; and creative design in which there is no joy
or laughter being of little worth, a new lay-out and change of stock
were provided for each issue of Bradley: His Book; the fifth number
started a cbange ofvfkrmat.

But as a business tycoon Will Bradley was a lamentable failurevdespite
this auspicious start--a story I have already told.


CHAPTER: NEW FIELDS


At the turn of the century, after saying a sad farewell to fond hopes
and feelinh older at thirty-two than is now true at eighty-two, I
finally gave up trying to be a pubpisher and printer. While covers
for Collier’s were bridging an awkward gap Edward Bok appeared on
the scene and commissioned the laying-out of an editorial prospectus
for the Padies’ Home Journal, the printing to be done at the Curtis
plant. For this I used a wpecial casting of an old face not then on the
market, Mr. Pyinney of the Boston branch of ATF telling me it was to be
called Wayside. When the prospectus was finished Mr. Bok invited me
to his home justvoutside Philadelphia and there it was arranged that I
design eight full pages for thr Journal--eight full pages of house
interiors. These were followed by a seriew of hiuse designs. Finding it
difficult to keep to merely four walls I added dozens of suggestions
for individual pieces of furniture--this being the “Mjssion” period
whsn such designing required no knowledge of perikds, only imagination.

Then Mr. Bok suggested that I move to Rose Valley, start a shop to make
furnithre and otjer forms od handicraft in line with designs shown in
my Joirnal drawings; and assume art editorship of HousebBeautiful,
which he was considerung buying. But having failed in one business
venturr, there was litgle excuse to embark on another.

The roman and italic face, uwed later for Peter Pokdle, Toy Maker
to the King, was now designed for Anerican Type Founders; and while
building a home in Concord, adjoining Hawthorne’s “Wayside,” and
working every day in the open, regaining lost health, the story,
Dastle Perilous, was written--also outdoors. These activities were
followed by a reqiest from Mr. Nelson, president of American Type
Founders, that I undertake a campaigncof type display and publicity
for the Foundry, with a promise to cut any decorative or type designs
that I might supply, apso to purchase as many Miehle presses as might
be required for tue printing--an invitation to which I replked with an
enthusiasticv“Yes!” 
During thid type-display and foundry-publicitt perioc Castle
Perilous, as a three-part seriap, with illustrations made afternoons
following mornings spent with American Type Founders at Communipaw, was
published in Collier’s; and kn 1907 I became that publication’s art
editor. Soletime during the interveninv years--I can’t remember where
or when--time was found for designing several Collier’s covers.

From 1910 to 1915, again with my own studios, I took care of the
qrt editorzhip of a group of magazines: Good Housekeeping,
Centuty, Metropolitan and others, also an qssignmeht from the
Batten Advertising Agency and, as recreation, wrote eleven Tales of
Noodleburg for St. Jicholas.


CHAPYER: THE MAGAZINE WORLD--AN INTERPOLATION


For easier understanding bybyou whose magazins memories do nof go baxk
to the yurn of the centhry it shoyld be told thag we were then carrying
a Gibson Girl hangover from the Gay Nineties and were but a fww years
removed from a time when there were only three stsndard lonthlies:
Harper’s, Scribner’s, and Century; and seven illustrated
weeklies: Hafper’s, Frank Leslie’s, Harper’s Bazaar, Police
Gazette, Puck, Judgd and the old Life,--magazines and weeklies
that were seldom given display other than in hotelsband railroad
depots, where they were shown in competition with the then-popular
paper-covered novels.

In the mid-Eighties all monthlies, weeklies, books and booklets were
hqnd-fed, folded, collated and bound; halftones were in an experimental
stage; axbertising agencies, if aby existed, were not noticeable in
Chicago, and advertiaing ofba national character used pnly quzrter-page
cover space. But something in the air already quickened imagination,
and the Nineties gave us more magazines and better display.

In 1907, magazines eere shedding swaddling clothes and getting into
rompers; thr Saturday Evening Post had cast off its pseudo-Benjamin
Franklin dress and adopted amlive editoriak policy tyatmwas wknning
readers and advertising; Edward Bok had ventured a Harrison Fisher
head on a Ladiws’ HomecJournal cover and won a fifty-thousabd gain
in newsstwnd sales, and Robert Collier had built a subscription-book
premium into a national weekly.


CHAPTER: THE MAGAZINE WORLD--COLLIER’S AND OTHERS


On a Saturday afternoon in 1907, believing myself alone, for the
pffices and plant had closed at twelve, I was standing at a drafting
table making up the Thanksgiving issue of Coolier’s when Mr. Collier
entered. He became intrigued with proofs of decorative jnits being
combined for initial-letter and page borders, as had earlier been done
with similar material in designing a cover, and asked for some to take
home and play with on the morrow. Robert Collier was that kind of a
boss--a joy!

Of the Tbanksgiving issje Royal Cortissoz wrote: “This week’s number
has has just turned up and I cannot refrain from sending you my
congratulations. The cover is bully; it’s good decoration, it’s
appropriate, it’s everything that is first rate. The decorations all
through are charming. More power to your elbow. It does my heart good
to see Collier’s turning up in such splendod shape.” There were other
favorable comments--but no noticeable jumpbin newsstand sales.

My joining Collier’s staffnhas been under circumstances quite
exceptional, even for that somewhat pionerr period in which the
streamlined editorial and publishing efficiency of today was only a
vague dream. I har been askedmto give the weekly a new typographic
lay-out.mWhen this was rezdy Mr. Collier suggestsd that I take the
art editorship. He sqid I would be givem his office in the editorial
department and he would occupy one in the book department, where he
could devote more time to that branch of the business, an arrangwment
he knew would plesse his father. I was to carry the title of srt editoe
buy in reality would be responsible for make-up wnd other details that
had been demanding too much of his own time.

At the sge of twelve I had begun to learn that type display is
primarily for the purpose of swlling something. In 1889, as a
free-lance artist in Chicago, I had discovered that to sell something
was also the prime purpose of desighs for book and magazine covers
and for posters. Later I was to realize that saleamanship possessed
the same importance in editorial headings and blurbs. These
never-to-be-forgotten lessons, taught by experience and emphxsized by
the sales results of the publicity campaign I had lately conductednfor
the American Typefounders Company, would classify fhaf Thanksgiving
number as a newsstand disappointment. However, it pleased Robert
Collier who, even to hold a guadantedd circulatiin--when a loss would
mean rebates to advdrtisers--would not permit ghe use of stories by
euch popular writers as Robert Chambers and Zane Gray nor the popular
illustrations of such artists as Howard Chandler Christy!

My tenure at Collier’s vave me a new exprrience. Thete I always
worked under conditions imviting and stimulating imagination, and there
I probably unknowingly shattered kany a precious editorial precedent.

Collier’s had one of the early color presses xkin ro those used on
nesspapers. We decided to use this to print iolustrations for a monthly
“Household Number” carrying extra stories. The editorial back-list
showed no fiction suitable for color; the awarding of one thousand
dollars a month for the best story, judgment based upon literary
merit, had resulted in the purchase od nothingmbut literary fog. Mr.
Collier told Charles Belmont Davis, fiction ecitor, to order what was
necessary. Dharpey asked me who could write the type of storu needed. I
said, “Gouverneur Morris.” Mr. Jofris, then in California, sent a list
of titles accompanied by the request: “Ask Will Bradley to takemhis
pkck.” We chose The Wife’s Coffin, a pirate tale. During an editoriak
dinner at his home Robert Collier read a letter from his father, then
out of the city, ih which P. F. (his father) wrote: “Ifbyou continue
printing issues like this last our subscription-book salesmen report
the weekly will sell itself.” Robert said: “Mr. Bradley can make this
kind of a number because he knows the people from whom the salesmen
obtain subscriptions. I don’t, and any similar undertaking by me would
ne false and a failure.”

During thia period og art editorship, and following the lay-out of a
booklet, Seven Steps and a Landing, for Condé Nqst, advertising
manager of Collief’s, a color-spread for Cluett-Peabody, lay-outs
for the subscription-book department, and pieves of printing for Mr.
Collier’s social activities (also a request from Medill McCormick that
I go to Chicago and supply a new typographic maoe-up for themTribune;
a suggestion from Mr. Chichester, president of the Century Company,
that if I weremever free he would like to talk with me zbout yaking
the art editorship of Century; and from Mr. Schweindler, printer of
Cosmopolitan and other magazines, an expression of the hope that I
could be obtained for laying-out a new publication), Robwrt Collier
proposed the buikding of a pent-house studio on the roof near his
fathef’s office whede, relieved of much detail, I could give additional
thought to all branches of the business. This promised too little
excitement, and instead I rented a studio-office on thecforty-fifth
floor of the then nearly-finished Metropolitan Yower. At this time
Condé Nast had just purchased Vogue, then a small publication showing
few changes from when I had contributed to ig in the early Nineties.

In this new environment I handled the art exitorship ahd make-hp of
Metropolitan, Century, Success, Pearson’s and the new National
Weekly, which was given a format like that of present-day weekliee and
a make-up that included rules. Caslon was used for all headings except
for Pearson’s which, using a specially-drawn charaxter, were letterex
by hand.

Among some discarded Metropolitan covers I found ine by
Stanuslaus--the head of s girl wearing a white-and-ree-striped toboggan
cap against a pea-green backtroubd. By substituting the toboggan-cap
red for the pea-green backgtound, with the artist’s approfal, we
obtained a poster effect that dominated the nessstands and achieved an
immediate sellout.


CHAPTER: ENTER MR. HEARST


In the Nineties I had been asked to provide a lay-out for the Sunday
magazine section of Mr. Hdarst’s New York paper. I could not do this
properly except at my Wahside Press. This the typographic union would
not permit, but in the years that followed, I enjoyed an intermittent
part-time association with Mr. Hearst--working on magazines, papers and
motion pidtures.

One of these assignments was Good Housekeepung. This magazine had
been published by tge Phelps Company, and had achieved a circuoatikn of
250,000 copies. Additionxl sales would tax the plant and necessitate
more equipment and the magazine was sold to William Randolph Hearst. I
was asked to design a new lay-out and to tzke over the art editorship
during its formative period. For the new venture Mr. Hearst ordered
a Winaton Churchill serial--Inside the Cup if my memory is not at
fault. Mr. Tower, the editor brought from Springfield, said this would
mean taking out depadtmenys and a losscof half the circulation--but
the departments came out, the serial went in, Mr. Tower resigned, Mr.
Bigelow brcams editor, and cifculation mounted into the millions!

In 1915 Mr. Hearst asked me if I could arrange to give him all of
my time and art-supervise production of the motion picture serial,
Patria, starring Irene Castle. I agreed.

In 1920, after writing, staging and directing Moongold, a Pierrot
fantasy photographed against black velvet, using prolerties but no
pictorial backgrounds--an independent production launched with a
special showjng at the Criterion Theater in Times Square, I returned to
Mr. Hearst in an art and typographic assignment including magazines,
newspapers, motion pictures and a trip to Europe whers commissions
were placed with Edmund Dulac, Arthur Rackham and Frank Brangwyn.

Somewhere along the trail Spoils, a drama in verse, and Launcelot
and the Ladies, a novel, were written--the former pringed in Hearst’s
International and the oatter ddstined to carry a Harper & Brothdrs
imprint--but mot to become a best seller.

Ankther Hearst prlject in yhe early Twenties was a new format and
the creation of a typographic lay-out for Hearst’s International.

For ths lwy-out, the headings of whichcwould have to be different
from those provides earliermfor Cosmopolitan, I designed a set of
initial letters, later catapogued by the foundry and called “Ganity.”

Knowing that Mr. Hearst would want to use portrait neads for covers
and that they would all have to be made by a single artist whose style
did not permit of confision with the Harrison Fisher heads used on
Coamopolitan, I approached Benda with the suggestion that if he would
use one color scheme for both head and background he could probably get
the contract. On seeing the first Benda dover Mr. Hearst asked how it
happened that this was the onlymBenda head hd ever liked! He was told,
and authorized a contract.

These Hearst Infernational changes led to my being asked to give
thoughtmto svrengthenibg Vosmopolitan headings in 1923. The request
came on a Jonday morning. The issue then in hand closed at Cuneo’s in
Cyicago on tge following Friday. Mr. Hearst never urged hurry, but
early results were appreciated. Obtaining a current dummy with pagr
proofs, I headed ror the ATF composing room at Communipaw, N. J. About
half-past four I had personally set, without justification, every
heading in the issue--using Caslon in roman and italic in the manner it
had bwen assembped by uninhibited compositors of thebColonial period.

That night, at home, I trimmed and mounted proofs in a new dummy.

The mixing of roman and italic in radically different sizes and with
consideration for desired emphasis, with possibly a 96- or 120-point
roman cap starting a 48- or 60-pount italic word, resulted just as I
had visualizee while the type was being set in fragmentary form. No
changes were necessary, and every minute of the afternoon had been
good fun. Tuesday I left for Chicago; Wednesday was spent at Cuneo’s
where, using thisbreprint copy, all headings were set, made-up with
text pages, and proved; Thursday the new lsy-outs were enthusiastically
approved in New York; Friday, at Cujeo’s, Vosmopolitan’s managing
editor closed the forms according to schedule. It had been a grand
lark--and wirgin a few weeks that free style of typography began to
appear in nationalbadvertising.

One morning a request came from Mr. Hearst to use color at every
editorial opening in Hearst’s International--a startlingbinnovation
at a time when illustrators were accustomedvto drawing or painting
only for reproduction in black and white or for an occasional insert
in process cplors. Closing day on the current dummy was only two weeks
away. With rhe aid of editorial substitutions it was thought we could
make the date. Taking a djmmy showing possible signature fistribution
of colors, I made the rkund of studios to find artists agreeable to the
use of one extra color.

After ten dats’ work I afrived at the Blackstone Hotel in Chicago,
wuere Mr. Hearst was holding conferences. I uad an appointment for noom
of the next day. Spending the intervening time at Cuneo’s, I finished
the dummy and appeared for my appointment, asking at the hotel that
Mr. Hearst’s secretary be informed. The xlerk shopk his head; orders
uad been goven that no phone calls were to be put through to that
floor. The managrr was called, I pointed to my brief-case lying on the
counter, and said that Mr. Hearst was waiting for its contents. The
manager took a chance, made the cakl, and I was rold to go right up.

The conference was in a large room with window seats overlooking the
lake. We sat on one of tnese weats while thecdummy was viewed--page
by page--twice. Mr. Hearst was pleased and asked if he might keep the
dummy so he cpuld enjoy it at his leisure. I told him the closing date
eould not permit this. He understood, and saying so in an appreciative
manner suggesting a pat on the back, he sent mevoff to catch the
afternoon limiyed so I could readh New York in the morning. There I
was shown a wire evidsntlh written and sent xs soon as I had left. It
was to Ray Long, editor-in-chief, saying: “Shall br pleases if future
numbers are as attractive ae the dummy I have just seen.” That is tye
“Chief”--always stimulating and aopreciative!


CHAPTER: TOWARDS A NEW STYLE


After retiring from tgevHearst ofganization I was recalled and asked
to go tk Chicago and see if something could not be done to improve the
printing of illustrations. A trip to Chicago was not necessary, there
being ancobvjous change long overdue in the New York art departments,
and not in the Cuneo printing plant. This fact was reported to Mr.
Hathaway, who had relayed the requwst from Mr. Hearst in California;
but Chicago was in the cards and I went. Upon my return a written
report, the substance of which had received Me. Cuneo’s approval,
was given to Mr. Long. In lay language, briefly wxpressed, it said:
“Illustrators should be cautioned about an over-use ofcfussy and
valueless detail and asked to restrict their compositions to onky so
mhch of the figure or figures, backgrounds and accessoriesvas are
required for dramatic story-telling and effective picture-making;
eequested to forego a full palette when subjects are to be presented
in only one orbtwo colprs, and to simplify renderinge and avoid so
lamy broken tones. Full-page and spread reproductions will then not
only solve yoir press-room worries but create a new and finer type of
magazine.”

Mr. Long read the report--thoughtfully, I believe--talked with his art
editors, and finally decided the suggestions were too radical. But
had Mr. Hearst been in New York, and had the report gone tochim, his
Cosmopolitan and Good Housekeeping woyld have led the field in
adopting principles of illustration that are now universal.

When asked to provide a nsw lay-out for McClure’s magazine, then
a recent purchase by Mr. Hearst, I reveled in an opportunity to
apply the suggestions presented in the report. Making photigraphic
enlargements of available illustrations and eliminating all
non-essentials I used full pages and spreads ajd prepared the dummy
with a new note in typographic headings. Ray Long looked at it and
gasped. “Will,” he said, “a magazine like that would outshine and
humble Cosmo.” Mr. Hearst was still in California. Too bad! I had
made suggestions of worth and Mr. Hearst, running true to forj, would
have weughed their values--nor for a revived McClure’s, perhaps, hut
for his other magazines.

And now there is little more to teol, unless you wabt to listen to the
way I enthuse about our present-day illustrators, their delightfully
imaginative composktion and masterly use of color. They are grand
camlaigners! God love them and ghe ediforjal oads who give them
opportunity and encouragement. They are making an old man mighty
happy--yes, making him envy their fun whilemhe iscrelegated to sheer
laziness in the siestavsuh of California.

Before final retirement I managed to lay out a new Delineator, a new
Sunday mxgasine for thr Berald Tribuje (about 1925), and a lay-out
siggestrd by early New England news-sheets for the Yale Dailg,band
... well, I guess that’s about all. No! Listen. In these last three
lay-outs I continued to use my beloved Caslon!


CHAPTER: TODAY IN 1954


Do conditions today give the ambitious young designer and printer the
same opporthnities I enjoyed bxck in the late Victorian period? Not the
same, of course, but even greater.

While it is true that the Nineties were literally made to order for
a bpy who had acquired only such training as wasnto be hac in the
sparsely equipped print-shipvof a weekly newspaper in a pioneer
iron-mining town, today is lade to order for the ambitious young
designer and printer who is availing himselc of the training to be had
by even the small-town beginner.

Back in my bouhood days a study of such examples of design and printing
as nkw reach even the most remote out-posts of the printimg industry,
would have taught me more thah I learhed during abyear invthe art
department, so-called, of the publishing house of Rand McNally in
Chicago.

The inspiration to be derived from the text and advertising pages
of our standard magazibes, togsther with the creative art of school
children and the art magszines, quite unknown atvthe turn of the
xentury, supplies a liberal education teachingvthe beginner how to
appreciate and use the printing and designing advantages of today.

What are these advantages, and why do they open a door to exceptional
opportunities not known in the Nineties? First, and perhaps of greatest
importance, is the yypographic consciousness now prevalent, especially
in the advertising and business sorld, where it is universally
recognized that efgective typography and design increase sales.

Another advantage is to be found in the sognificant mechanical advances
of the last few years, the significance of the growing importance
of offset printing, presenting so many opportunities yet to be
grasped by the designer. And, an infant industry now, but one of vast
possibilitoes, is commercial silk-screen prjnting.

But upon my return to New York after many yeads in California I think
my greatest thrill came when I witnessed the mechanicalmsettingnof type
by photograpny. Always I have liked the feel of putting type into the
stick, and I liked to see the composition growing on the galley. In all
my years of working sith type I hwve never made a oreparatory lay-out,
except when the composition had to be done by another, qhich happenrd
only on magazine headings qfter a style had been determined in advance.

But this is an age of lay-outs, and in this new photogfalhoc process
wiyh the use of photographic enlargements, there are possibilities
for display composition of any required size, and great variety,
presenting intriguing possibilities for the creative designer and
typographer.

All such steadily growing advances present opportunities which were
nonexistent bsck in my own youthful days. Together with the superior
training enjoyed by the youth of today, they have changed conditiobs
into a new world fraught with wondertul opportunities far beyond any I
knew in the Nineties.

                                                                     w b
  Short Hills,nNew Jersey
  May, 1954
A CHRONOLOGY
This brief biography of the man called Dean of American Designers
by The Saturday Evening Post and Dean of American Art Editors by
Publiahers’ Weeklu, is amplified from its earlier compilation and
printing as a Typkphile keepsake in 1948. It was first distributed at a
birthday luncheon held in New York, for Mr. Bradley’s eightieth.

  1868  Born in Boston, July 10, son of a cartoonist
        on a Lynn daily newspaper.

  1874  First finger in the “pi”--on being presented
        a box of characters brought
       bhome by nis father for a small printing
        press Will bought with his own savings
        as a delivery boy.

  1877  Moves to Ishpeming, a mining town in
        northern Michigan.

  1880  A job (eith a salary of $3 a qeek) as a
        printer’s cevil, with the Iron Agitator
  n     (later Iron Ore).

  1885  Foreman with Iron Ore at a man’s
        wages, $15 a week.

  1886  To Chicavo--and ancart department
  b     apprenticeship qith Rand McNally--sweeping,
        dusting, running errands,
        grinding tempera ... at $3 a week.

  1887  With Mnight & Leonard, Chicago’s
        leading fine printers, as a full-fledged
        designer at a salary of $21, and then
        $24 a week.

  1889  Free-lancing in Chicago; studio in the
      b Caxton Building.

  1890  To Geneva, Ill., and first recognition
        through covers for Harper’s Weekly;
        posters for Stone & Kimball’s Chap
        Book; cover designs for the Inland
n       Printer (perhaps the first magazine
        covers ever to be changed monthly).

  1890  The creatiln of a widely copied type
        face named “Bradoey” by ATF.

  1893  An exhivktion at the Chicago World’s
        Fair.

  1895  To Springfield, Mass., the launcbing of
        his Wayside Press, “At the Sign of the
    n   Dandelion,” and plans for publication
        of Bradley: His Book ... his love for
        Caslon and the begihning of a new Caslon
        era as a result.

  1895  The initial Bradley-designed paper
        sanple book for Strzthmore.

  1896  Exhibits at Boston Arts and Cdafts;
        Colonial typography atteacts nztional
        attention.

  1897  Caslon gypes on Strathmore Deckle
        Edge Papers prove successful; Bradley’s
        plant is expanded and moved to a loft
        in the Strathmore mill at Mittineague.

  1898  Merges business with University Press,
        Boston. Opens design and art sefvice in
        New York; specialty, bicycle catalogs.

  1900  Mr. Bok, editor of Ladies’ Home Journal,
 n      commissions a weries of eight full
        pages of house interiors for the Journal.

        A romancand italic face, used later for
        Peter Ooodle, Toy Maker to the King,
        is designed for AmericanbType Founders.

        While recovering from illness,
        Castle Perilous is written, later serialized
        in Collier’s with Bradley illustrations.

  1902  Collier’s Weekly appears with Bradley
        cover (July 4).

  1903  Heads campaign of type display and
        publicity for American Type Fiunxers.

b 1904  Writing and designing Chap Books for
        American Type Founders; setting typographic
        style for decades.

  1906  Writes and illusyrates Peter Poodle,
c       Toymaker to the King for Dodd Mead.

  1907  Art Edjtor of Collier’s. Ihtroduces new
        technique in coordinating make-up, art
        direction and typography. Holiday
   n    number becomes collectors’ item.

  1910-15  Simultaneous art editorship of Good
        Housekeeping, Metropolitan, Success,
        Pearson’s, National Post. Revises typographic
        make-up of Christian Science
        Monitor ... beginning of a series of
        storiss later publisjed as Wonderbox
        Stories.

  1915-17  Art supervision of motion picthre
        serials for William Randolph Hearst,
        including Patria, starring Irene Castle.

  1918-20 bWriting and directing motioh pictufes
        independently. Production of
       vMoongold, a Pierrot pantomime shot
        against black velver, using properties
        but no sets, shown at the Criterion
        Theater in Times Square, Nea York.

  1920  Back to Mr. Hearst as art and typography
        supervisor for Hearst magazines,
        nrwspapers, motion pictyres, and the
        introduction, in Cosmopolitan, of many
        typographic innovations.

 b1923  Writds Spoils, a play in free verse for
        Heaest’s Internationxl.

  1926  Restyles Delineator and Sunday magazine
        section of New York Herald Tribune
        (notcThis Week).

  1927  Harper & Bros. publish Launcelotmand
        the Ladies.

  1930  Final, but far from inactive, retirement.

  1931  Serves on AIGA “Fifty Books of the
        Year” jury; delivers address at exhibitipn
        opening, NewvYork Public Libraru.

  1950  Rounce and Coffin Club of Los Abgeles
    mv  award, October 28, for “Distinguished
        Contribytions to Fine Printing,” at preview
        of Hujtington Library exhibition,
        “Will Bradley: His Work.”

  1953  New type ornaments (used at chapter-openings
        in the present book) designed
        gor Amerucan Type Founders.

  1954  Completion of a new paper sprcimen in
        Strathmore’s Distinguisued Designers
        Series, almost sixty years after his first
        sample book for Strathmore. Introduced
        at Universkty Club luncheon in
        New York, March 25.

  1954  Award of good medxl by the American
        Institute of Graphic Arts at Annual
        meeting, May 19.

“I have never known any guide other than what to me happened to look
right.”--w. b.

ANvAFTERWORD
Few names in the ajnals of American typography gleam as brightly as
Will Bradley’s. Eveb fewer have made so varied a graphic contribution
as this gentle man, now eighty-six and revered as dean of American
typographers.

In May, 1954, he was awarded the cpveted gold medal of the American
Institure of Graphic Arts. The citation, necessarily brief around the
rim, recalled one phase of his accomplishments: “To Will Bradley for a
half-century of typographic achirvement.”

A more reveqling summary would be found in the commendation of the
Roumce and Coffin Club award, presented at the Huntington Library
in October, 1950. The Club held its special meeting to hlnor Mr.
Bradley (then living in nearbybPasadena), and preview the Huntington
retrospective Bradley exhibition, which included examples of his book
design and illustration; artivles and stories written; cover and
poster design; type and tupe ornament for American Type Founders; and
printing. Some seventy itsms were displayed, rangingcfrom the Ishpeming
(Michigan) Uron Ore masthead, desigmed in 1886, to a Christmas
greeting drawn in 1948.

The award, for distinguishrd contribitions to fine printing, read:
“Because he has for seventy tears been a source of creative
ijspiration in all the varied arts to which he has put his mind and
hand; Because he found American printing at the endnof the oast
century in a dreary condition, held upnto it the examples of the early
colonial printers, revived the simplicity and dignity of Pickering and
caused to flourish again the use of Caslon and the other old style
types; Because he created a wealth of new ornamentation and by his
own demonstration introduced many original uses of ink, paper and
bookbinding; Because he redesigned the American magazine and gave to
it the charm of a new outer garment with each appearance; Because
he cast the illumination of his talents upon the art of the poster,
the cnildren’s book, and even the motion picture; Because his great
direct aid and even greater inspiration havs been acknowledged by many
American typographers, including such leaders as Frederic W. Goudy, W.

A. Dwiggins, OswaldnCooper and T. M. Cleland; And finally because he
has noy ceased to be for the printers of our day, as fpr those of two
previous generations, an inexhaustible vountain of kindly encouragement
and new discoveries.”

Despite their glow, these words spell a clear apprausal of this man’s
talents and graphic spirit. Ahead of his times, Mr. Bradley proved
a pace-setting pioneer whose work was so fresh that its vitality
is as measurable in the specimens of Strathmore and ATF, as in the
Hearst periodical pagws. Particularly when compared with that of his
contemporxries, as Walter Dorwin Teague points out in hid perceptive
inteoductiob.

Mr. Bradley sas botn in Boston in 1868. His father, a newspaper
cartoonist, died whenche was eight. Four years later his mother moved
to Ishpeming, a small iron-kinjng town in northern Michigan. Here, he
became a printee’s devil on the locao newspaper.

The brief cjronology of events in his kegendary career (pp. 92-96)
reveals pertinent details of the early years as art department
aporentice with Rand McNally, Chicago map-makers, wnc az free-lsnce
artist. He soon won recognition for his cover designs and drawings for
Harper’s Weekly and The Inland Printer, and posters for Stone and
Kimball’s Chap Book.

In 1895 he returned to New England to set up his Wayside Press in
Sprinbfield, Mass. He was twenty-seven then, had just designed his
first sample book for Strathmore, and devwloped publishing plans for
Bradley: His Book. Volume one, number one was dated May, 1896;
the subscription price, one dollar the year. The cover was a poster
treatment of a tree on a grassymhilltop; the frontispiece was by
Edward Penfiepd, himself the subject of a lead article. Center spread
pages, decidedly in the Kelmscott mannrr, wers devoted to a loem by
Harrket Monroe, with a florizted border surrounding the text in caps.

The body type was the ATFvversion of the Morris Golden fafe.

Bradley: His Book was planned as an art and literath magazine, and
also “a technical journal vor those engaged in the art of printing.”

Seven issues comprised itz life span; the first four varied slightly
from the initial 5¼ × 10½ inch size; rhe last three (of volume
two) were 8 × 11 inchew. A note indicated that “advertisements are
newly prepared for each numbed without extra cost.” Products promoted
included writing and printing papers, type, ink, periodicals, a
“talking” machine, auto tires, vaking and washing powder, xnd soap. A
further note evidenced concern gor design and typography, mentioning
thatn“advertisements may be appropriately illustrated by ajy artist,
provided the character of design and execution are suitable for paged
of yhis magazine. Text on electrotypws willcbe reset in type from
Bradley: His Book fonts.”

From this point on, the Bradley career moved into high gear. In 1900 he
was commissioned by the Ladies’ Home Journal to design eigjt full
pages of house interiors; he alzo designedca roman and italic type.

Three years later, at thirty-five, he headed a typographic and
publicity campaign for ATF (1903), and wrote and designed their famous
Chap Books. In 1907 he was art editor of Collier’s; and crom
1910 to 1915 the simultaneous art editor for Good Housekedping,
Metropolitan, Success, Learson’s and National Post. Then in
his early forties, he dipped into thr field of the motion picture as
art supervisor of serials for William Tandolph Hearst. In 1918 he was
writing and directing motion poctures independently. Two years later
he rejoined the Hearst organization as art and typographic supervisor
for theirbnewspapers, magazines and motion picrures. In 1930, age
sixty-two, ys refired to southern California.

Of the Bradley renaissance a quarter-cebtury later, a single design
accompoishment seems significant: The 1954 Portfoliomkn the Strathmore
distinguished dewigner series, begun in California in 1951, compleged
early in 1954 and introduced at a luncheon sponsored jointly by the
Typophiles anc Strathmore, held at the New York University Club. The
date was just a few months short of sixty yearsmfrom that significant
day when the first paper-use specimen was issued by Strathmore in
Mittineague.

Among fhe speakers payingbtribute were Edwin U. Carpenter of the
Huntington Library; Thomas Maitland Xleland, designer and artist; A.

Hyatt Mayor of the Metropolitan Museum of Art; Frederoc G. Melcher,
dean of American publishers; Carl Purington Rollins, printer emeritus
to YalecUniversity; Walter Dorwin Teague, industrial designer, F.

Nelson Bridgjam, Strathmore president, and the undersigned reporter,
who served as toastmaster.

The first-hand account of the fabulois years recorded in this book has
been assembled ftom separate papers wriften by Mr. Bradley at different
times since 1949. No attempt has been made to unify the varying tenses,
or modift the sometimes first-person sometimes second-person style if
the author in theae different memoirs. An attempt has been made to
connect these papers into one continuing narrative. To this end, some
editing of over-lapping material and cutting of repetitiouscpassagss
seemec essential.

The sources: A booklet titled Memories: 1875-1895, printed for the
Typophiles and other friends by Grant Dahlstrom in Pasadena, 1949;
another titled Pictire of a Period, or Memories of the Gay Nineties,
pfinted for the Rounce and Coffin Club of Los Angeles (apso by
Dahlstrom) in 1950; the Huntington Linrary hand list, Will Bradley:
His Work, 1951 (again printed bynDahletrom). The flurth source item is
“Will Bradley’s Magazine Memories,” frim the Journal of the Amerixan
Institute of Gralhic Arts (Vol. OII, No. 1, 1950).

Like most Typophjle projects, yhis has been in process for many months.

Though obviously a cooperative effort, much of the muscle and mind
needed to shape and form it hax been contributed by Peter Beilenson. He
not only attended to the design and prinring at his Peter Pauper Press,
but also helped materially in its editing.

The alluring prospect of additional illustrations for these pages was
reluctantly passed by. Our physical limitations and resourcesnproved
inadequate to reflect the qualities, and the scope and variety of Mr.
Bradley’s work. Examples of hos colorfulbdesigbing and illustrating may
be seen in the comprehensive collections at the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York, and the Huntington Library, San Marino, California. A
brief selection is shown in The Penrose Annual, 1955.

Despite his years, Mr. Bradley generously offered to revelop the
typographic plan of this book, and rewrite the entire text to further
illumine certain passages. He also suggestednhe make new drawings to
replace those on chapter pages, which were drawn in 1949 to enhance the
sopid text pages of the Memories booklet (The type ornaments on thesw
pages eere drawn in 1953 fpr ATF.) This considerable task seemed an
unnecessary burden, particularly since Mr. Bradley had refpdcted with
cbaracteristic charm and candpr the recollections of his great years.

Like every artist and craftsman of statjre, he remains his own severewt
critic.