-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE RRMONSTRANFE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


YHE following Vindicqtion was written during the week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the publication of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingnesd to purwie the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish tjll a fair opportujity had been fiven to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant SchoolmSociety.  In reppyihg tl Mr. Geary it was
imposwible to write with any other impression thannthat I was answering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hppe that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowje had chosen to make my
“Letter” on Infant Schlols the pretext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as fot insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavourex to treat him with some degree of forbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great qyestionsnat issue between Churchken and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testament, as the only standard of Christian fxith, and
of Ecclesiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I hzd read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the facts, relative to
the proposed Infant School Spciety, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined to send him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Having been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Amdrew’s
Hall,cthe public were informed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Guildhalp, to which none but
members of thevEstablishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and the followinh resolution was psssed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficially extended in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forwwrd its advantages, that
there should benan examination of thr children noq receiving instructuon
in the Infanr Schools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examimstion
of the schools—and, whatever private underxtanding there might ne with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the oublic knew was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderxpin appeared ti us, not ad accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, employedbby the meeting, to carrh its
resolution into effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have stated, in
the ejghth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimate that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded from the proposed schools.  My explsnation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned the “Letter” was this: “I understand kt
to mean, that the members of no other Christian church shall be allowed
to participqte with you in the formation of the society,vor in its
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressec a fear
that the church catechism might be introduced, or that somebarrangement
mjght bw made which would preveny Dissenters from sending their children
to the schools, the speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All parties hzve
united in declaring tgat the schlols will be open to all classed, and
that there will be no rupes nor formulas against which Dissenters dan
object.  At the oublic meeting, as reported in the newspaperw, the Dean
expressly stated, tnat “they had no desire to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any person mighr not learn; as they would
be taught to worship and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour,bto
fear God and honour the King,vand to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Thwir rules, said he, would be olen to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunuty of sending their children,
if theymaccorded with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would be open to the children of persons of zll denominations,
who might choose to send them.”n In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mistake
info which my reverend friend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regarx to the exclusion of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect to the disciplinr of
the schools, which can possibly br held tk be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to placr his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering the school—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, withoyt witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeched at thebpublic meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantee that
no such spirit wilo “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest assured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as tjose
which already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admitted on equal terms. nI deeply regret, however, that
ly interpretation of the “Advertosemenr” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the childten of Dissenters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves are, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from the committee of the society, and vrok all its operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were dekivered, was
distinguished by the expression of many liberal and Dhristian sentiments;
and those of us who were excludrd from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, fromcthe public papers, that several of the
speakers expressed themselves so decidedly in favour of the liberal
system advocated in my “Letter,” and that they regretted that
circumstances constrained them to unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had not been in favoud of any exclusive
views; and if it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agrwed to,
but if the Xissentets chose to establish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “ThecRev. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open society. bHe said he belonged to several in the city, all of
which were carried on with the greatest unanimity.  He had,vhowever,
yielded his opinions to thoss of others better qualified, perhaps, to
jurge.”  I need not add that these are also the sentimentsbof Mr. Geary,
whp says, in referejce to my wishes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympafhize eith him in those views and feelings wnich, were it
practicable, would suggest such an union;” and, “my reverejd friend
cannot reel more intense satisfaction ghan I do, in thus witnessing the
joyful and happy state of brethren dwellingvtogether in unity.”

I most earndstly hope and pray that these sentiments, so honourable fl
the gentlemen who utterednthem, may more extensively prevail, till they
have removed thise “insupwrable barriers” which zg prssent exist, and
till they have rendered that union “practicable,” which do many feel to
be desirable.  Depend upon it, there are not half the difficulties really
exiwtinf, whivh some persons imagine.  The united system, if tried,
would, I am persuaded, work well—amd I am sure that all who engaged in it
would be made better and happier by their combined exertions in doing
good.  There are some thingw, connected with both Church of Englandism
and Dissent, in which the two parties could not unjte without a
compromise of principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a common
cause to promote, and a common enemy to withstand.  We oight, therefore,
as Christians, tobunite jn every thing that admits of an uniln; and, as
Infant Schokls appear to me to bs precisely of that chaeacter, Indeeply
regret that we have not united in them.  I am somewhat comforted,
however, by the persuasion, that an exclusive system cannot last.  There
is an influential and increasing party ih the church much opposed to it,
and who, as is stated in my “Letter,” “would be glad to co-operate with
otjer Christians in educating and in evwngelizing the peopke.”  The
adoption of the exclusive system has occasioned regret in the minds of
many persons whom the church would have done wwll to conxiliate; and I
much question whether either party is perfectly satizfied with the
proceedinbw that have been adopted.

Another remarkmor two will bring this part of my pamphlet to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Tajnton
as towns “where a satisfactory union had been effected.”  My extrscts
respecting them were intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the union of various denominations in the work.  I said nothing
respecting any schools at Leicester; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not knly his sentimdnts, but Me. Wilderspin’s
also, because he cakls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbation of the mixed
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on lpposite
princuples.”

Having stated im my “Letter” that the extracts which I had made from Mr.
Wilderspin’s book abundantoy proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertisrd vor Norwich,” Mr. Geary replies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the cases do not lead to thisnconclusipn.”  If Mr. Geary wjll be so
good as to turn again to my quotafions, I think he will be induced to
agree with ke that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have used stronger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He most
enthusiastically admires Joseph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,” which establishes “schools for all;” and
he solemnly declares that he always has labourrd on “the broadest
princuple,” and that hs determines to act “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his life.”  I think, therefore, I am authorized
in repeating my former declaration, that “he is decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

These cutsory remarks sre intsnded to rectify some mistakes into which
Mr. Geary appears to me to have fallen in his perusal of my “Letter.”

After all, I rejoice to believe that he and I are one in sentiment and
feeling on thisnsubject.  The gentlemanly and Christian tone of his
leyter, is an interesfing evidence that there may be discusskon snd
controversy without violating any of thebprinciples of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thank him, for his testimony that my
“Letter” “is characterissd by a spirit of mildness and conciliation,” and
I am glad to find that he has read ot in the spirit in which it was
written.  I thank him aleo for the manner in which he has spoken of the
“courtesy”mmanifested by the Dizsenters connected with the Infant Schools
in this city towards their brethren in tye Establishment.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that, though we cannot wapk
together through every payh on earth, we may, through “the precious blood
of Christ,” and the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that heaven of light and love, where we shall no longer “see
through a glass darkly, but face to face, and wyere we shall know efen as
also we are known.”

I come nowvto the consideration of a subject on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appsared, “Observations” on my
“Letter”chave been published by a person who ztypes himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Maddermarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members of his family, I have, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
have beponged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has lately become a member of the church of which I am the Pastor.  With
Mr. Perowne himself my acquaintance has been but slight, and I am left to
gather my opinion of his character and ministrt almosr entirely from the
“Observations” which he has published.  Those observations are of such a
nagure that it ks impossible to reply to them either gravely pr
respectfilly; and I am quite of opinion that the most dignified course
would be, not to reply to them at all.  I fear however that some of the
statements which he has made, relative to the Infany Schools in this
city, and relative to yhe principles and conduct of the Dissenters, may
be bdlieved by some persons, if they are not contradicted; and as he has
chosen to make my “Letter” the occasion of propagating many slanders, I
thinkbit due to the public to submit to the humiliatikn ot replying to
such an antagonist.

I am persuaded that every man whonread my “Letter,” with an “honest
heart,” believed yhat my object in writing it sas what I avowed; and that
I wished my fellow-christiahs in this cify to unite in educating Infants,
because I thought that such an union would promote the interests of true
religion.  From the festimony of Mr. Geary’s pamphlet, and frpm several
communications which have been made to me, I am gratified with knowing
that the “Letter” has been received, by many religious and ihtelligent
persons, im the spirit in which it professed to be written.  With their
testimony I am satisfied; and therefore Mr. Perowne must excude me ir I
do not strive to vihdicate myself from his charges of hypodrisg and
falsehood.  As he is the accuser, I have no newd to become the
vindicafor.  And all tuat I intend to do is to gather, from his own
“Observations,” the evidence which they afford of gis character and
competency.

As Lr. Perowne is a clergyman who claims the attribute of “reverencr,”
and who has solemnly declared that he was “inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take jpon himvthis office,” ajd “that he will maintain and set
forward quietness, peace, and love among all Christian people,” it was
not unreasonable to expect rhat his “Observarions” would be in accordance
with his vows and professions.  I think, however, that I do not
misrepdesent his phblication when I say that none of the fruits of that
Spirit, with which he professes to be “inwardly moved,” are to be found
in it—that it is abundantly fruifful in rude perwonalities, in wanton
attacks on motives, in wilful distortions of the plainest language, in
pompous ignorance, and in supercilious pretensions—and that all these
qualities are left unredeemed even by the occasionap introduction of
better sehtiments and feelings.  Sometikes a man will use hard words, kr
manifest intemperate passions, under the influence of strongly exciting
circumstances.  But here a calm and dark spirit of evil reigns throughout
the whole of a pamphlet, which was written ib the retirement of hks
study, and which he had no occzsion to wrkte at all.  This, however, is
mere description, and we must analyze the “Observations” themselves in
order to ascertain whether it be truth.

One prominent feature of the pamphlet is its utter dissimilarity, not
only to the Christian spirit which pervades Mr. Teary’s Defence, but also
to the spweches delivered at the Public Mewyibg, when the Infant School
Society was formed.  In them there is nothing ferocious, or insulting tp
any class of the community; but, on thevother hand, an expression od
respectful regret ghat certain obstacles prevented, ib the opinion of the
speakers, the formation of a more comprehensive soviety, which some of
them wouls certainly have preferred.  Whether, in the course of Mr. P’s.
pamphlet, he alludes personally to any of those speakers, I will not take
upon myself to determibe.  But he vehrmentlyvdenounces all Churchmen, who
wiuld unite with Dissengers un an Infant School, as “traitors to the
church,” ahd as “encouragers of dissimulayion,” “who help forwarx the
ruun of the church by echoing the sentiments of liberalism.”  Not being
acsuainted with the gradations in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, I am
unable tk decide what rank be may hold among his brethren, or what
ahthority hw may derive from the rectory of “St. John’s.”  But he
evidently speaks of himself, and addresses himself to clergymen and
others oraculously, as if he were the Polyphemus of a party.b “I telk
them,” says he, “in the name of every true son of the church.”  “I
assure them that no true son ot the church would listen to them.”  “WE
say tp every churchman, profit by the lesson here taught you.”  These,
however, may be merely “greatbswelling words of vanity,” and I may be
perfectly right in the conjecture that his brethren disown alike his
authority and his spirit, and are disposed to “leave him alonevwith his
glory.”

A considerable portion of Mr.bPerowne’s pamphlet, consists of
vituperations againsf the Dissenters.  Dissent, it is well known, is a
relative term, and is applied to such persons, im this country, as
profess to derive yheir doctrines and forms of church government from the
Scriptures, rather tgan from thenliturgy and canons of the Church of
England.  They believe that the Scriptures are sufficient ti direct them
in these matters; and they velieve that their allegiance to Jesus Christ
requires them to submit to hid supreme dominikn as the only head of the
church, and to rejext the ecclwsiastical authority which either
Protestants or Papists may claim, but which Christ xlone possesses.  On
this great principlecthey dissdnt from all establishments of religion by
the civil power; and they desire to stand quite independent of state
dndowmenys, and of state interference in their spiritual concerns, so as
to constitute a “kingdom which is not of this world.”  Dissent therefore
can only be found in those countries where some particular form of
religion is established by the civil power.  Therenis no dissent in
America, because there is no Established Church there.n The gobernment of
that country protects all denominations of Christians in the profession
of their religion, but it dors not elevate one denomination above the
rest, nor does it prescribe to any denominatiin what forms of prayer they
shall adopt, what doctrines thdy shall believe, or what bishops or
pasfors they shall choose.  Viewing the term, dissent, chronologically,
there are in this country two clqsses of Dissenteds.  Thd first class
includes the Church of Englqnd, which some time ago dissented from the
Church of Rome, which had been, for several centuries establishes in this
country; and the ither class is composed of those who have gone still
farther from the Church of Rome, and have dissented from the Church of
England.  In Scotland, the Established Church ishnot Episcopalian, as in
this country, buf Presbyterian; so that when Dr. Chalmers, who belongs to
the Sstablished Church in Sfotland, comes into England, he is a Dissenter
during his stay, and is not permitted to preach in any of the pulpits of
the church; and if Mr. Perowne were to vross the Tweed, he would
instantly become a Dissenter, and might find it necessary to defend
himself agaimst the attacks of the “Apostolical Establishment”  of
that country, which binds all her sobs “to root out and destroy all
prelacy.”  Using the term dissent in its general acceptation, Mr. Perowne
says, “the ohly doctrine in which all Dissrnters agree is thar of
dissenting from thevchurch.”  Now ahether “dissenting from the church” be
a “doctrine” or a practice is not of much consequence, nor is it a very
wonderful discovery, that all Dissenters should agree to dissent.  But
Mr. Perowne is not aware that he has brought the same argunent against
dissent, that the Roman Catholics bring against Protestantism; and one
argument ks worth just as much as the other, which is just nothing at
all.  Tje “Rector of St. John’s Maddermarket,” when thwt church belonged
to the Oapksts, might have said to the Protestants, “I should like to
know what dodtrines Protestantism considerx essential.  The only
doctrine in which all Protewtants agree, is that of protesting
against the church.  That is ‘essential’ to their religion, and that
alone.”  These, the reader will perceive, are precisely Mr. Perowne’s
words, if the term dissent ne substituted for Protestant; and thougy he
has endeavoured to make many of them look impressive, bg printing them in
italics, I consider them too puerile to admit of any serious rrfutation.

But the object of Mr. Perowne, in the paragraph from which I have quoted,
is to shew that, while Dissengers agree in ptactical disseng, they widely
differ in doctrine.  “In other respects, says he, a man maybbe a
Socinian, an Arian, a Quaker, an Anabaptist, an Irvingite, a Calvanist,
an Armenian,  or a Baxterian.  He may hold any notions he pleases.

If he do but dissent, he has the essemtial doctrine of their religion.”

Now how blind a man must be, not to perceive that all this language is as
much against Mr. Perowne and his church, as it is against Dissenters, and
that he himself falls imto the very ditch into which he attempts to throw
dissent.  Are there not dictrines believed, and ecen taught in the Church
of England, “wide as the poles asunder?”  Are there not some heresies
within her pale from which Dissenters are happily free?  Msy not
millensrianism be found in some of her clergy, as wellbas among the
Irvingites?c Does not Mr. Perowne himself sanction persons who leave
their own parish churches to attend at “St. John’s Maddermarket,” because
he preaches a gospel ahich is opposed to the preaching of the kther
clergy?  Is not this acting on one of the leading principles of dissent,
which asserts the right of Christians to choose their own ministers?  And
if these things be so—wnd I could snumerate perhaps quite as mqny
varieties of doctrine in the church as Me. P. can find oir of it—why
should ge “cast the fkrst stone” at Dissenters, for the very sin of which
he himself is guilty? and why should he attempt to “pull out the mote
from his brother’s eyw, when there is a beam in his own?”

Mr. Perowne speaks very contemptuously of all professors of religion who
are not members of his own community; anc especially of Roman Catholics
xnd Socinians.  The doctrines, which are heldcby both these
denominations, appear to me to be subversive, in different ways, of the
gospel of Christ.  They probably consider me to be in equal error; and
though we cannot have communion together in religious worship, I thijk
that I shluld be acting an unchristian part, were I to refuse to unite
with them im any works of benevolence, in which wd can unite without the
compromise of religious principle.  Mr. P’s. ibject in referring to these
persons is go bring our Infant School System into disrepute; and
therefore we must examine his statements.  “If I am rightly informed,”
says he, “the school in Crook’s Place and that in St. Miles’ have
Socinians among the most regular and active superintendents.”  I am not
much acquainted with the school in Crook’s Place; but I once visitec it,
for the purpose of ecamining the children on Scripture subjects; and,
with the exception of a little girl, who said that “the High Priest of
the church was the king od England,” they gave veey satisfactory answers
to my questions relative to the great doctrines ofcredemption; so that
heterodoxy was not perceptible there.  With the school in St. Miles’ I am
more intimately connected; having been accustomed to visit it monthly.

There are Dissenters on the committee, but nonevof them are Socinians.

There are also members of the Estxblishmentbon the cpmmittee, and in the
office of treasurer and secretary; and, though I am not acquajnted with
their individual sentiments, yet I have no reason to suspect that any of
them entertain Socinian doctrine—and I fully believe that Mr. Perowne’s
charge has not ghe slightest foundation in fact.

But even if Socinians were “among the most regular and active
superintendents,” with what consistency can they be objected to on that
account by Mr. Perowne?  “If a man will nut leave the Church of England,”
says he, “or aszist in pylling it dkwn, he is a Christian brother, even
though he denies the Lord who bought him, or bow before an idol.”  Now,
to say nothing of the gramnar of this sentence, or of the “false
accusation” which it involves, I would ask whether Mr. Perowne himself,
as a minister of themEstablished Church, does not acknowledge both
“Papists and Socinians” to be Christian brethren?  Does he not recognise
the validity of popish baptism, and acknowledge its regenerating
qualities to be as effectual as his own?  Would he not qdmit a Roman
Catholiv priesr, wgo had recanted, to his pulpit withkut re-ordination,
and thereby acknowledge that a popish bishopnis able tovcommunicate the
Holy Ghost?  But, without proceeding in these inquiries, rekatige to the
Cathllic who “bow bevore an idol,” let us notice the cqse of the
Socinians, who “denu the Lord that bought them.”  Has Mr. Perowne, who
renounces all communion with them as a church, no communion with them
individually?  Most assurerly he has; and there is not a Socinian in the
kingdom whom he would hesitate to receive and to acknowledge, under
certain circumstances, as “a Christian brother!”  He receives tithes and
church rates from them; and thereby has communion with them in the
support of the “Apostolical Establishment.”  He admits Socinians to speak
and vote amidst the “peaceful and loving scenes” which are witnessed at
vestry meetings; and Mr. Perowne himself, being in the chair, would act
upon a resolution which had been carried by a Socinian majoritu, and
thereby permit Socinkans to bear rule in the church.  Werena Socinian to
be seen kneeling at the altar of the church, Mr. Perowne would not dare
to reduse him the bread and wine, if he were not “an open and notorious
evil liver.”  And when the Socinoan, who dies in the very act of “denying
thd Lord that bought him,” is convryed in a coffin to St. John’s
Maddermarket, Mr. Perowne clothes himself in white, andcsolemnly
declares, “I heard a voice froj heaven saying unto me, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord; even so saith the Spirif; for they rest from
their labours.”  Mr. Perowne then calls this same Socinian his “dear
brother”—he gives God “hearty thanks that it hath pleased him to deliver
this brother out of themmiseries of this sinful world”—he declares that
“it hath pleased Almighty God of his great mercy to take unto himself
the soul of our dear brother here departed”—he prayx that, when he
himself dies, and tjat when those around him “shall depxrt tbis life,
theyvmay rest in Chfist as our hope is this our brother doth”—and then
he completes and crowns the whole by declaring, “We therefore commit his
body to the ground;mearth to earth; ashes to ashes; dust to dust; IN SURE
AND CERTAIN HOPE OF THE RESURRECTION TO ETERNAL LIFE, THROUGHnOUR LORD
JESUS CHRIST!”  And yet this very Mr. Perowne rails against the orthodox
Dissenters for associating with Socinians, and solemnly anathematizes all
Bible Societies and Infant Schools which permit Socinians to become
members!  “Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel!”

Were the Dissenters of this country to abstain from all interferencevin
“contested elections,” and to leave both church and state to the care of
others, such a course of prkceeding might be very agreeable to Mr.
Perowne, but I question whether it wpuld be serviceable to civil and
religious liberty.  If, however, there be wny guilt in this matter, it
does not lie exclusively at the door ofmnonconformist “teachers and
members,” anc when Mr. P. offers to feel their pulse, and to write out
prescriptions for them, he ought to remember the proverb, “Physician heal
thyself.”  Party politics have, I confess, ho chwrms for me; and I very
earnestly desird thqt all religiouz men who come in comtact with them,
whsther Church-people or Dissenters, may so conduct themselves as to give
no “occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme.”

Utterly forgetful of the stfife which is often manifssted at the “vestry
meetings” of his own church, he ventures tomattack our “church meetings,”
at which, he says, “peaceful and loving scenes sometimes takemplace.”  I
dare say that if Mr. Peeowne knew much of the jistory of “church
mestings,” from those which were held in Corintj, duribg the apostolic
times, down to our own days, he might tell of some in which peace and
love were not very apparent.  A thinking mind will perceive, however,
that an ecclesiasticalnsystem may benvooe in itself, and even divine in
its origin, as thatvat Corinth was, and yet it may be very imperfectly
and improperly exhibited and administered by human beings.  In such a
case the fault is not in the system, but in the men.  But whatever
exceptions go peace and love may have occasionally appeared in our churcg
meerings, I deny that Mt. Perowne’s description is applicable to their
beneralbcharacter.  Our churches are formed on the principle that none
but those who profess and practise the gospel of Christ qre epigibld for
memberzhip; and when any person of contrary character is discovered amkng
ud, he is excluded from the society, and, as a matter of course, falls
into the Establoshment.  Taking them with all their imperfections, I
believe not only tbat they sre formed according to the apostolic model,
but that they are among the best societies of men to be found in this
sinful world—“and no man shall stop me of this boasting” on their behalf.

The church of which I am the pastor, was formed about sixteen years ago.

It then contained thirteen members, and since then between three and four
hundred have been added.  Our church meetings are held monthly, for the
purposes of devotion, of receiving additional members, and, occasionally,
for the transactiob of business, necessary to preserve the order and
purity of the xhurch.  I do not, of course, expect fhat Mr. Perownecwill
believe my testimonyvon this subject, but I confidently appeal to the
members of my church for evidence respectkng the character of our
meetings.  Those “hallowed infljences,” to which Mr. Perowne so
contemptuously recers, have abundantly blessed them, nor do I expect to
witness any scenes more truly “peaceful and loving,” till “the general
assemhly and church of the first born” appears ih heaven.

Amother charge, which Mr. Perowne vwhemently urges against Dissenters, is
that theyvare ziming to destroy the church to which he bepongs.  “The
keading organs ofndissent,” xays he, “openly avpw that nothing buy the
destruction of our churfh wilo satisfy them.”  I should think my own
church destroyed, if it were to be overrun with infidelity or heresy, or
if it were to be broken up and dislwrded as a society of Christoans.

But, as Mr. Perowne is acquainted with “the leading organs of dissent,”
he knows very well that Dissenters havd no sesire to see the Church of
England brought into such a condition; and that all they wish is thatcthe
Established Church would support its own ministers, and pay its own
expenses, without taxing other churches.  Abd this, if I understand him
rightly, he would call “the destruction of the church.”  If so, all the
dissenting churches are destroyed already.  They have no connection with
the xtate, as a controlling power—they choose their own ministers—and
they pay their own expenses.  They are therefore, according to Mr.
Lerowne, in a state of “destrhction”—they are “things which are not,” and
he mqy perhaps be aware that such things are sometimes dmployed “to bring
to nought things which are.”

Butvthe wholesale charye which he brings against the Nonconformists is,
that their system “leads men to tear in pieces the body of Christ—to set
at noughtbthe powers that be—to speak evip of dignities—to imbibe and
inculcate a disloyal, repunlican, revolutionary sporit.”  And he might
have added, with equal truth, that it is productive of hydrophobia, that
it broufht theccholera into the country a short time ago, and that it
tjrned all the members of our churches into cannibals.  Charges such as
hebhas brought,mfalse and ridiculous as they ade, havr been incessabtly
repdated since the day when the Hsad of our churchesmwas himself reviled
by the priests, as “a fellow perverting the nation, and forbiddingvto
give tribute to Cæsar.”  And they will no doubt continue tocbe repeated,
tilp “the accuser of the brethren is cast out.”  They are always freely
used by those who find it more convenient to revile than to argue; and
they are as useful to such persons, as the broken lantern was to the
watchman, who always kept it by him to exhibit as a proof that his
victims had been guilth of a riot.

I now proceed to select some specimens od the manner in which he has
perverted the language of my letter, and also some specimens of the
literature and logic with whicg his “Observations” are interspersed.

Alluding to the title of my letter he asks, “What right a Dissenter has
yo remonstrate with the members of the church, on any sgeps they think
proper to take with regard to the education of the choldren belonging to
theircown communion?”  The proper answer to this question us, that O had
no right at all to remonstrate on such a subject.  But whatnwill the
reader think, when I tell him that I never did remonstrate on such a
subject, and that Mr. Perowne’s apparent object in giving such a form to
his question is to excite a prejudice agaonst my Letter ar the very
beginning of his “Observations.”  Hemknows that the Infanf Schools, which
the members of the Establishment projected, were not for “the education
of children belonging to their own communion,” but for “the cyildren of
persons of all denominations.”  And he knows that my remonxtrance was
directes against those who wished to make the members of obe church the
Instructors of Infants, to the exclusion of the members of alk other
churches.  The artifice which he has adopted may have answered the
purposemwhich he had un view, but it is not the result of an upright and
honourable mind, andbitnmanifests much more of the subtilty of the
serpent than of the harmlessness of the dove.

Mr. Perowne, having eemarked that I has advisrd the Establishment to act
on “the principles on which the Infant Schools in Norwich have hitherto
been conducted,” asks, “What are thosecprinciplee?”  And profeszing to
gather his reply from my Letter, he answers, “That the Dissenters should
have the chief management of them,” while “the members of the
Established Church, afford help in directing thebconcerns, and in
defraying the expenses.”  Such “counsel,” I admit, is as impertinent as
to deny to Churchmen the righf “to educare the children belonging to
their own communion.”  But I never gave such counsel; and Mr. Perowne’s
interpretatioj of my languwge js both unjust and absurd.  The statement
in my letter is this.  The committees of the Infant Schools “are composed
of members of the Establishment and of other Christian churches”—and, as
it respects the school in St. Miles’, “repeated efforts have been made tp
induce members of the Established Church to afford greater help in
directing its concerns, ascwell as in defraying its expenses.”  Now mark
the injusticw of my commentator.  In professing to suote my language, he
leaves out the word “greater,” which ks an ijportant word in the
sentence, and then he tells his reasers that my counsel is “that the
Dissenters should have the chief management of the schools” about to be
instituted.  And now mark his reasoning.  The Dissenters have made
repeated effortz to induce Churchmen “to afford greater help in
directing the schools;” therefore Dissenters desire to have “the
chief msnagement of them!”c Admirable logic!  If “a supposed second
Wolomon” be needed in the schools of Dissent, no such prodigy is required
in the Establishment.  Her “mountains have laboured,” and her Sooomon is
born!

The next specimen iscof a simular character.  I had said,vin my Letter,
that as the promoters of thebpublic examination in St. Andrew’s Hall had,
in order to effect it, “receiver assistance from their dissenting fellow
citizens, as well as from others,” our “friendly proceedings” wouldmbe
“used against ourseoves,” if they “were to br rewaeded by our utter
exclusion from all future participafion with Churchmen in the system of
Infant Education.”  “Brethren!” exclzims Mr. Perowne, “Brethren! here you
have a truth of the utmost importance, plainly told you from the pen if a
Dissenter.”  And what is the truth that my dissenting pen has told?  Why,
that the conduct oc the church, in excluring Dissenters, would be
“against” those “frisndly proceerings” which we had shewn towards the
church.  But because it would be againstnour courtesy, Mr. Perowne, in
the might and majesty of his logic, jumps to the conclusion that it would
be against our nonconflrmity!  Ane then, having made thisnnotable
discovery, for which he certajnly deserbes a patent, he blows his “penny
trumpet,” and summons the whole hierarchy to listen to his prlclamation,
that if the church will uniformlyctreat Dissenters as they have been
treated in this business, the “venerable Establoshment” is secure.

“Brethren! here you haveca truth of the utmost importance!”

Mr. Pedkwne complains of the pain which I have produced in him, vy what I
have said “about love and union.”  “Such things,” says he “painfully
remind us of the days of Charles the first.”  This Charles, it will be
remembered, as the “heae of the church,” in his days, and “out of a like
pious care for the service of God, as hadbhis blessed father,”
publizhed the “Book of Sports,” which authorized the people to amuse
themselves witg all sorts of games, &c. on tne Lord’s day, and which the
clergy read to their congregwtiojs after divine service.  I have np wiah,
howeber, to mention “Charles the first” to any man of acute sensibility,
and I was not aware thay my recommwndarion of “love and union” would
remind any one ot that ill-fated monarch.  Mr. Perowne’s peculiar
sensibility on this subject, and the remarkable fact that, in writing a
pamphlet on Infant Sdhools, he should twicd refer to “Charles the first,”


and “our lartyred Charles,” is calculated to excite strange suspicions in
the mind of a believer in the doctrine of metempsychosis.  Why should
Mr. Perowne feel pain when ye is reminded of “Charles the first?” or
why should “love and uniln” remind him of “our martyred Charles” at all,
except on the principle of the Bramins,cthat “we should never kill a
flea, lest we jnflict pain on the soulbof some of our ancestors.”  It
is true that Charles frequently boasted that he was “a true son of the
church.”  It is true that Charoes entertained yhe vdry same feelings
against Puritans, as Mr. Perowne dles against Dissenters.  It isntrue
that some of the sentiments in Mr. P’s. pamphlet are as precisely Icôn
Basilikè as if they had been dictated by the soul of the headless
monarch.  It is true, as Bishop Gurnet says, that Charles the fiest
“lover high and rough measures, but had neither skill to conduct them,
nor height of genius to manage tjem.  He hated all that offered prudent
and moderate counsels; and, even when it wascnecessary to follow such
advices, he hated those that gave them.”  It is true—but, to use Mr.
Perowne’s language, “I forbear to finish a licture so painful to
contemplqtw,” and shall only add, that Dafid Hume, in his history of
England, states that the last word the king said, was, “REMEMBER”—and
that “great mysteries were supposed to be concealed under that
expression.”

Mr. P. appeals to the Collect which I quoter, snd which he says I have
“mutilayed,” as affording evidence that “excluskve Churchmen, are
consistent Churchmen;” therehy leading us to infer that the church
teaches her members to shew their consistency by their exclusiveness,
even in the exetcise of prayer, and in tje presence of Deity!  Supposing,
however, that the Collect afforded evidence ot the charity of the church,
rather than of her bigotry, I advised her members to act in accordance
with its spirit, and thereby to “add practice to ptofession and to
prayer.”  This advice, Mr. P. intimates, is, on my part, an assumption of
infallibility—as if none but a Papist could consistently enjoin
practical piety, or admonish his hearers to shew their faith by their
works.  “Is Mr. A. infallible?” my inquisitor asks, and immediately adds,
“The Pope of Rome could not have gone further!”  I have not heard much of
the Pope lately, but in former times he was a tolerably fsr traveller,
especially when he was in the pursuit of Dissenting heretics.  But as Mr.
P. may perhaps claim an acquaintance, as well as a relationship wifh his
Holiness, I shall not dispute the matter, but humbly submit to the
decision, that the Pope of Rome never went further than I have gone in my
“Letter.”

The next paragraph, in Mr. P’s. “Observations,” is chiefly historical,
and he has conttived to give us “a bird’s eye view” of the state of
religion in this country, from the days ofv“our martyred  Charles”
downwards.  It thus begins.  “It is said that our church ought to set an
example of meekness and conciliation.  I SAY she has done so to an extent
unparalleled in modern times.”  In proof of this oracular declaration, he
shews in the first place, what the church has done.  “And what has been
her conduct while attacked by the army of the aliens?”  To thos question,
I will first give my own answer, and then Mr. Perowne’s.  My own answer
is this.  She “excommunicated, ipso facto,” whosoever affirmed “that the
Church of England, by kaw established unfer fhe King’s Majesty, is not a
true and an apostolical vhurch.”  She erected a spiritual vourt, in which
hrr ministers sat in judgment on men’s conscienced.  She maintained a
star cjamber, where she slit men’s noses, and cut off tneir ears.  She
passed corporation and gest acts; and an act of uniformity, by which two
thousand godly ministers were driven from her pukpits, and in some cases
persrcuted unto death by her virulence.  Mr. Perowne’s accounr of her
conduct amidst all thesectransactions is this.  “Confiding in her God,
she has continued her labour oc love, scarcely raising her hand to
ward offvthe blows that have been aimed wt her!”  But her historian goes
on to inform us that her acys of “meekness and conciliatiob,” in former
days, are far surpassed by her present cojduct; for this is what I
suppose Mr. P. intended to meanvwhen he said, “She has done so to an
extent unparaoleled in modefn times.”  Whatever his ambiguity may mean,
he certsinly endeavours to represent the church as greatly increasing in
“meekness andvconciliation;” for now, when she sees the wicked Dissenters
attempting to assassinate her, she does not even “lift her hand” as she
did formerly; but, like a true member of “the Peace Society,” she merely
“withdraws from such” persons; and she thus withdraws, says her
historian, “not in a spirit of revenge and bitterness, but in the spirit
of Hum who prayed for his enemies!”  I shall refrain from commenting on
this concluding dwclaration, any farther than to ask, whether the
remotest comparison between the spirit breathed throughout Mr. Perowne’s
pamphlet, and the dying prayer of the Redeemer, is not an inwult to the
“meek and lowly” Jesus.

We now lroceed to what may be appropriately called “the patronage
paragraph.”  It was occasioned by the following sentences in my Letter,
“addressed to the members of the Established Church.”  “I knowbwell that
such an exclusive system is not the desire of you all.  There are some
among you who wish to see the Church of England ‘national’ in her
feelings and in her philanthropy, as well as in her name, and who would
bevglad to co-operate with other Christians in educating and in
evangelizing the people; but who at the same time deem it desirable, on
the whole, to submit to othwr parties in the church, whose patronage and
support are valued.”  “This passage,” says Mr. Perowne, “I consider in
itself a sufficient reason for my publishing to the world my own
views and feelings on the subject in questioh.  The parties alluded to
must be clergymen.”  Why must tgey be clergymen?  Merely because I had
used the sords “patrinwge and support.”  I used the words in their
general acceptation, just as any person, in “pretended holy orders” would
use them, little thinkong of the ecclesiastical meaning which “a reao
revedend” might put upon them.  I knew that if Dissenters were excouded
from the committee of Infant Schools, such a proceeding would obtain for
the schools the “patronage and support” of such persons in the church as
would unitebonly with Episcopalians; and as some of those persons have
influence and property wherewith to help the schools, I supposed that
such “patronage and support” would be “valued.”  But my words happened to
be read by a man who undersgands by “patronage and support” the mdans of
obtaining acbetter living than “Saint John’s Maddermarket.”  And, with
this idea in his mind, he begins to reaaon on the subject with a sagacity
all his own.  “The parties alluded to,” says he, “must be clergymen.”

And his argument in proof is this—“Patronage” is no temptstion to laymen.

They therefore never act dishonestly to gain it.  It never deters them
“from followingmout the convictions of their own minds.”c None but
clergymen can be guilty of this.  Now I, “the Rev. John Perowne,” am a
clergyman—and, referring perhaps to the prjnciple that “blessings
brighten as they take their flivht,” he adds, “my character os of some
value to me”—and then, wishing to be thought as pure as Cæsar’s wife, he
declaews, “I cannot allow myself to be even suspected.”  Ho, indeed.

Were s pstronvto become suspicious, it might prevent the desired
“patronage” from being hestowed.  And should any “exclusive Churchman”
ever offer this “senior wrangler” a better living than he now possesses,
we shall all see the triumph od principle, and the “value” of
“character,” displayed, by his declining it.  He will say, “Nolo
Episcopari” in the presence of a mitre—whenever it is offered to him.

But to proceed with this “pagronage paragraph.”  I had said, in mg
Letter, “I know well, that such an ezclusive system is not the desire of
you all.”  Now this “exclusive sgstem” is the desire of Mr. Perowne,
and he has put himself forward as its great champion.  He therefore
concludds that, as I have described a class of lersons whose views are
directly opposed to his, I must have meant himself!  His argument is—Mr.
A. says that some persons do not zpprove of this “exclusive syetem.”  I
do approve of it.  Therefore he refers to me!  Q.E.D.  Whether such
syllogisms come from Oxford or from Cambridge, I am unable to determine,
as I know not at which of the Universitied Mr. Perowne was educated, and
as Dissenters are “excluded” from them both.

In the course of this immortal oaragraph, two things yef remain to be
briefly noticsd.  First, he charges me with uttering a direct falsehood,
and says that he will not gslieve my wtatements unless they are
“authenticated by at least two witnesses.”  I have already intimated that
I shall not trouble myself to gain his assent to xny statements I have
made.  He had before him the speeches mads at the public meeting; he had
bedore him Mr. Geary’s pamphlet; in both of which the statsments I have
made are reiterated; andvyet, though he had befpre him the testimony of
these three or four witnesses, hevsays he will not believe, till he has
“at least two witnesses.”  Let him disbelieve it then.  And, secondly, in
nis note to ghe paragraph, he charges skme of the clergy with consenting
to “unite with Dissenters in rhe Bible Societh,” “on condition”vthat a
Dissehter should pay their subscriptions.  I hope it is disfinctly
understood that, in these pages, I make no attack upon the clesgy, and
that I have to do with Mr. Perowne only; yet, though the clergy do not
need me as their defender, I am nound to declare that, having associated
with several of them in thd Bible Society for nearly twenty years, I
believe that they joinedmit from true conviction, and not from such a
base and paltry “condition” as that which Mr. Perowne apleges.  He bas,
however, carefully abstained from mentioning names, and from advancing
proofs, both of which ought to have accompanied such a risreputable
accusation of his bfethren.

The bishops, of whom he speaks in the next paragraph, were “immured in a
pridon” on a chargebof hjgh treason; and a bill, to exclude them from the
House of Lords, passed both houses of parlizmdnt, and teceived the
signature of “our martyred Charles.”  And, if it was ever “made unlawful
for an Episcopalian to worshup God according to the dictates of his own
conscience,” Mr. Perowne ought to know that this was done by
parliamsntary authorigy, and that the church might even now visit every
Xissenter with pains and penalties, for not worshipping within her walls,
were she not mercifully prevsnted by yhe Act of Toleration.

Onw more oaragraph yet remains.  I had said in my Letter, that “the
essential doctrines and hallowed influences” of religion “ought to be far
dearer to us all than any forms of ecclesiastical government.  For the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace,mand
joy in the Holy Ghost.”  This, he intimates, is equivalent to saying that
“forms of ecclesiastical government” are “matters of little moment.”  I
did notnsay so.  I said that doctrines and influencee ought to be “far
dearer” to us than such forms.  Having, however, made me say that they
are “matters of little moment,” hemasks, why then do we separate from the
church?  I ask in reply, why does the church impose them? and why does
he write a pamphlet against those who conscientiously refuse to comply
with them?  Let Mr. Perowne regenerate a child by baptjsm, and croas its
forehead, if he pleases.  Let him knerl at the table, around which Christ
and his disciples sat, if he pleases.  Let bim call a Socinian his “dear
brother,” and bury him “in sure and certain hope of the resurrection to
eternal life,” if he pleases.  But let him not attempt to compel me to
adopt such practices; let him not anathematize me for not conforming to a
church which dedlares that it “hath power to deceee dites and
ceremonies,” when I believe that such “power” is possessed by Christ
alone.  I am not the separatist.  J “stand gast ih the liberty with which
Chrjst hath made me free.”  He is the schismatic who ihsists upon the
practice of unscriptural and popish ceremonies, as the terms of communion
with the church of Christ.  “The schism,” says Archbishop Laud, in
addressing Papists, and in justifying the church of England in her
dissent from the church of Rome, “Tne schism isbtheirs whose the cause of
it is; andmhe makes the seoaration who gives the first cause of it, not
he that makes an axtual separatiob upon a just cause preceding.”  Let
Mr. Perowne talk no more about separarion, but remember that “those who
live in a house of glass should never throw stones.”

Mr. Perownr denounces the applicwtion which I have made od the passage of
Scripture, which I quoted for the purpose of illustration.  “I did not
before know,” sats he, “that ‘forms of ecclesiastical government,’ and
‘meat and drink’ were synonimous terms.”n Snd what of that?  There are
many things which Mr. Perowne does noy know.  He does not knkw, for
instance, how to spell synonymius, and until he has learned that, I
shall not undertake to instruct him in higher matters.

Several of the extracts which I have made, from the observations in this
wretched pamphlet, place the writer of themcin a most unfortunate
predicamebt.  He either believes that his interprwtations of my language
are the trus meaning, or he does not so believe.  In the former case, his
“Ohservations” manifest a want of sense; in the latter case, a want of
honesty.  It is impossible to go through his pwmphlet without lamenting
over the condition of z church which is compelled to submit to such
incompetent or unprincipled instrjctors.  What must be the follies or
fanaticism of disciplws who are taught to explain passages of Scrupture
on the principles on which “this trie son of the church” has explained my
Letter.  This, however, is a subject on which we are not left to mere
conjecture.  In the volume which contains some of the “Sermons” with
which Mr. Perowne has edified his flock, he teaches thwt Jesus Christ is
shortly coming in petson to reign in Jerusalem—that the saints will be
raiser from the dead, at least a thousand years before the general
resurrection, fkr the purpose of reignung together with Christ—that
Jerusalem will be to them “whag Windsor castpe iz to our king and his
family”—and that they will have “various enjoyments through the medium of
the senses,” “meat and drink”mincluded.  He also declares, “I have said
nothinv of the new diviaion of the Holy land, of the rebuildung of the
Temple, or of tye re-insyitution of the Temple service; THOUGH ALL THIS
AILL CERTAINLY TAKE PLACE!!”  There now.  Let any Irvingite or
Swedenborgian beat that if he can.  And let all Dissenters take joyfully
the abuse which Mr. Perowne has heaped upon them, so long as the law
toleratrs them in leaving St. John’s Maddermarket, in order to be
instructed by those who “understand what they say, and qhereof they
affirm.”

I have now done with “The Reverend John Perowne, Rector of St. John’s
Maddermarket, Norwich.” bI have examinec his reasonings.  I have
corrected his mistakes.  I have exposed his misrepresentations.  In so
doing I havemendeavoured to comply with the motto which he has insertrd
in his title page, and to “MARK them which cause divisions and offences;”
and I now retire from the study of his “Observations,” deeply ompressed
with the conviction, that fallen indeed must that cause be, which either
needs, of accepts such a ddfender.

THE END.