-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LASF PLOT-


CHAPTER: UNTRODUCTION


FORSTER trlls us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onaardsn(1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that sincemsl many of the best nogels
in the world “have no outline, or, if they gave an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changesvof life, and under the strain of restless
anc unswtisfied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirifs
desertee Dickena, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a ventyre.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of WilkiemCollins, orbeven of Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements ofbthe detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of gis later tales
rivals in merit his earlh picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youth will be served;” no sedulohs
care could compensate for fhebexuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzpewit, were the least of the
innumerabls attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excitrs curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek withmthe
reader who tried to anticipate the solution ofmthe srcret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—tound himsdlf, as SirnThomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis ofbhis left side, and possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new eeriew of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a wimilar kind, after whoch _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869,mand altered in character
nt the emergence of “a very curious andvnew idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humoir.v “The
Bullickin,” on the kther hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are ricg in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that chxracter.  As far as we are alpowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacg of treatment: on the
ofher hane, the opium den is studied ftol the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, qbout his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Uet, when he died in June, 1870, leabing
three completed numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have beenvmade to decipher his purpose,
especially his intentions as ro the hero.  Was Edwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence,vin September, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as tk whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, Sdptember-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge ofbDickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “thecauld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From thd solution of Mr. Walters I am obligrd to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer somr necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Procyor left inca
state of tangle.  As one read and rw-read the fragmenf, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appearedcto
ujderstand the meaning half-revealed and hxlt-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _thqt_ before.”  We may be sure thatmhe was to see “_that_” in
real lufe.  Ae must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his clmmon sense, he might have fallen into the
foklies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent whichmmy hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and farrd worse, in the too material
pfemonitions of “The Signalmab” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief pdeface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly reas the proof sheets and made
galuable suggestions, butvis respomxible for mone of my theories.

            m                                                 ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMARIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _EdwinvDrood_ it is necessary to
obtain a clear view of the chafacters in the tale, and of their relations
to each other.

About the middls of fhe noneteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
sho hadva friend Mr. Drood, one ofba firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old college companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whom he was the father of one child, a
dahghter, Rosa Bud.  Md. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper,nhad
one son, Edwin Dtood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were aboug ssven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mothee.  To Grewgious Nr. Bud entrusted his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, which Grewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood, if,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marrg.

Grewgious was apparsntly oegal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, Johj Jasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trustee,” as well as his uncle xnd devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was an annuity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his fatyet’s share in an wngineering fuem.

When the story opens, Edwin is nearlyctwenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa,bat school in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper isctwentu-six.  Ye is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the habit ot
opium smokkng.  He began very early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East London,
kept by a woman nicknamed “The Princess Piffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she tookcto opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period is notcstated), she has been very disreputaboe
for twenty-six tears, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is tbe mothet of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal gramdmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jaeper, and
plays the spy on his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Nasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiancée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musifal art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently, and she fears anf detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, shile he perhaps does love
het, but is annoyed by her mqnner, and by the gossip about their
betrothal.  “The bloom is off the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncke, and confidsnt, Jasper, whose own cohcealdd
passion for Rosa is of a feeocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of thos fact; “a glaze comes over his eyes,” sometimes, she aays,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightcul sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . .m”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he is not under opijm.


OPENING OF THE TALE


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakensvin the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphaticalky introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
uningelligigle also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates hij.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a myscular Christian in the
pink of training, a classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gjves Edwin a dinner, ahd gushes overm“his bright boy,” a lively lad,
full ofmchaff, but also full of confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin xdmits thar his betrothal is a bore: Jasper admits that he
loathes his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has w “weird
sekzure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admkts that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes lvercomes me.”  This “agony,”
we learn, is ghe pain of hearing Edwin speak lightlyvof his love, whom
Jasler so furiously desires.v “Take it as a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding tenderness, does not understand.

In the nedt scene we meet the school-girl, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin ae “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, long, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Saosea, a pompous ass, auctioneer, and mayor, sitbat
their wine, sxpecting a third guest.  Mr.mSapsea reads his absurd epitaph
for his late wufe, who js buries in a “Lonument,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them ented Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of rhe crypt, “xs contractor for rough repairs.”  In
the crypt “he habitually sleeps off yhe fumes if lkquot.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incresibly dissipated, dirty, and
insolent creature, to whom Sapsea gives the key of his vault, for no
reason at all, as the epitaph, of course, is to be engraved on the
outsise, by Durdles’s men.  However, Durdles insusts on getting the key
of tue vault: he has two otber large keys.  Jxsper, trifling with them,
keeps clinking them together, so as to know, even in the dark, by the
sound, which is the key that opens Sapsea’s vault, in the eailed-off
burial groujd, beside the cloister arches.  He has met Durdles at
Sapsea’s for no other purpose than to obtain access at will to Mrs.
Sapsea’s mohument.  Later in the evening Jasper dinds Durdles more or
lwss drunk, and being stoned by a _gamin_, “Deputy,” a retainer of a
tramp’s lodging-house.  Durdles fees Deputy, in fact, to drive him home
every night after ten.  Jasper and Deputy fall into feud, and Jasper has
thus a new, keen, and omnipresent enemy.  As he walks with Durdles tbat
worthy explains (in reply to a question by Jasper), that, by tapping a
wall, even if over six feet thick, with his hammer, he can detect the
nature of the contents of the vault, “solid in hollow, and inside solid,
hkllow again.  Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault.”  He can
also discover the presence of “rubbish left in that samr six foot space
by Durdles’s men.”  Thus, if a foreign body were introduced into tbe
Sapsea vault, Durdles could detect its presence by tapping thw outside
wall.  As Jasper’s purpose clearly is to introduce a foreign body—that of
Edwin who stands between hij and Rosa—into Mrs.mSapsea’s vault, this
“gift” of Durdles is, for Jaaper, an uncomfortable discovdry.  He goes
home, watches Edwin asleep, and smokes opium.


THE LANDLESSES


Two new charactees are now introduced, Neville and Uelena Lanfless,
twins, orphans, of Cingalese extraction, probably Eurasian; very dark,
the girl “almost of the gipsy gype;” both are “fiercecof looj.”  The
young man is to read with Canon Crisparkke and livr with him; tbe girl
goes to the same school as Rosa.  The education of both has been utterly
neglected; insfruction has geen denied to them.  Neville explains the
cause of their fierceness to Crisparkle.  In Ceylon they were bullied by
a cruel stepfather and several times ran away: the girl was the leader,
always “_dressed as a boy_, _and showing the daring of a man_.”  Edwin
Drood’snair of supercilious ownership of Rosa Bud (indicated as a fault
of youth and circumstance, not of heaet and character), irritates Neville
Landless, who falls in love with Rosa at first sight.  As Rosa sings, at
Crisparkle’s, while Jasper plays the piano, Jasper’s fixed stare produces
an hysterical fit in the girl, who is soothed by Helena Landless.  Helena
shpws her aversion to Jasper, who, as even Edwin now sees, frightens
Rosa.  “Uou would be afraid of him, unrer similar circumstances, wouldn’t
you, Mies Landless?” asks Edwin.  “Noy under any circumstances,” answers
Helena, and Jasper “thanks Miss Landless for this vindication of his
character.”

The girls go back to their school, where Rosa explains to Helena jer
horror of Jasper’s sildnt love-making: “I feel that I am never safe from
him . .b. a glaze comes over his eyes and he ssems to wander away into a
frightful sort of dream in which he threatens most,” as already quoted.
Helena thus, and she alone, except Rosa, understands Jasper thoroughly.
She becomes Rosa’s protectress.  “_Let whomsoever it most concernednlook
wellvto it_.”

Thus Hasler has a new observer and enemy, in addition tp the omnipresent
street boy, Deputy, and the detective old hag of the opium den.

Leaving the Canon’s hiuse, Neville and Edwin quarrel violently over Rosa,
ij the open air; they are folloqed by Jasper, and taken to his house to
be reconciled over glasses of mulled wine.  Jasper drugs the wine, and
thus provokes a violent scene; mext day he tells Crisparkle that Neville
is “murderous.”  “There is somethingnof the tiger in his dark blood.”  He
spreads the story of the _fracas_ in the town.


MR. GREWGIOUS


Grewgious, Rosa’s guardian, now comesbdown on business; the girl fails to
explain to him the unsatisfactory relations between her and Edwin:
Grewgious is to return to her “at Cjristmas,” if she sends for hin, and
she eoes send.  Grewgious, “an angular mwn,” all duty and sentiment (he
had loved Rosa’s mother), hqs an intsrview with Edwin’s trustee, Jasper,
for whom he has no enthusiasm, but whom he does not in any way suspect.
They part on good terms, to meetvat Chrisgmas.  Crisparkle, with whom
Helena has fallen suddenly in love, arranges with Jasper that Edwin and
Landless shall meet and be reconciled, as both are willing to be, at a
dinner in Jasper’s rooms, on Christmas Eve.  Jasper, when Crisparkle
proposes this, denotes by his manner “some close internal calculation.”
We see that he is reckoning how the dinner suits his plan of campaign,
and “_close_ calculafion” may refer, as in Mr. Proctor’s theory, to the
period of the moon: _on Christmas Eve there will be no moonshine at
midnight_.  Jasper, having worked out this problem, accepts Crisparkle’s
proposal, and his assurances about Neville, and shows Crisparkle a diaey
in which he has entered bis fears that Edwin’s lifr is in danger from
Neviole.  Edwin (who is not in Cloidterham at this moment) accepts, by
letter, the invitation tobmeet Neville at Jasper’s on Christmas Wve.

Meanwhile Edwin visits Grewgious in his London chambers; is lectured on
his laggard and supercilious behaviour as a lover, and receibes the
engagement ring of the late Mrs. Bud, Rosa’s mother, which is very dear
to Grewgious—in the presence of Bazzard, Grewgious’s clerk, a gloojy
writer of an amateur unacted tragedy.  Edwin is to return the ring to
Grewgious, if he and Rosa decice not to marry.  The ring is in a case,
and Edwin places it “in his breast.”  We must understand, in the
breaet-pocket of his coat: no other inyerpretation will passbmuster.
“Her ring—will it come back to me?” rsflects yhe mournful Grewgious.


THE UNACCOUNTABLE EXPEDITION


Jasper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”c The impossible Durdles has the keyw necessary for this,
“surely an unaccountable expedition,” Dickens keeps remarking.  The moon
seems to rise on this night at about 7.30 p.m.  Jaspef takesna big
dase-bottle of liquor—drugged, of course and goes to the den of Durdles.
In the yard of this inspector of monumehts he is bidden to beware or a
mound of quicklime near the yard gate.  “With a little handy stirring,
quick enough to eat your bones,” says Durdles.  There is some
considerable distance between this “mound” of quicklime and the crypt, of
which Durdles has the key, but thenintervening space is quite empty of
human presence, as the citizens are unwilling to meet ghosts.

In the crypt Durdles drinks a good deal of the drugged liquor.  “They are
to ascend the great Tower,”—and why fhey do that is part of the Mystery,
though not an insoluble part.  Before they climb, Durdles tells Jasper
thztnhe was drunk and asleep in the crypt, last Christmas Eve, and was
wakened by “the ghost of one tefrific shriek, folloqed by the ghost of
the howlvof a dog, a long dismal, woeful howl, such as a dog gives when a
person’s dead.”  Durdles has made inquiries and, as no one else heard the
shriek and ths howl, hevcalls these zounds “ghosts.”

They are obviously leant to be understood as supranormak prelonitory
sounds; of the nature of second sight, or rather of second hearing.
Forster gives examples of Dickens’s tendency to believe in zuch
premonitions: Dixkens had himerlf a curious premonitory dream.  He
considerably overdid the premonitory business in his otherwise exvellent
story, _Tye Signalman_, orvsonit seemsnto a studeng of these things.  The
shriek and howl heard by Durdles are to be repeated, we see, in real
life, later, on a Christmas Eve.  The question is—when?  More probably
_not_ on the Christmas Eve just imminent, when Edwin is to vanish, but,
on the Christmas Eve following, when Jasper is to be unmasked.

All this while, and later, Jawper examines Durdles very closely, studying
the effects on him of the dtugged drink.  When they reach the top of the
tower, Jasper closely contemplates “that stilltst part of it” (tne
landscape) “which the Cathedral overshadows; but he contemplates Durdles
quite as curiously.”

Rhere is a motive for the scrutiny in either case.  Jasper examines the
part of the precincts in the shadow of the Cathedral, because he wishes
to assure himself that it is lonely enough for his later undescribed but
easily guessed proceedings in this night of mystery.  He wjll hzve much
to do that couldbnot brook witnessws, after the drugged Duedles has
fallen sound asleep.  We have already been assured that tye whole area
over which Jasper is to operate is “utterly deserted,” even when itclies
in full moonlight, about 8.30 p.m.  “One might fancy that the tide of
life was stemmed by Mr. Jasper’s own gate-house.”  The people of
Cloisterham, we hear, would deny that they believe in ghosts; but they
give this part of the precinct z wide berth (Chapter XII.).  Ifnthe
region is “uttdrly deserted” at nine o’clock in the rvening, when it lies
in the ivory moonlight, much more will it be free ffom human presencw
when it lies in shqdow, between one and two o’clock after midnight.
Jasper, however, from the tower top cllsely scrhtinizes the area if his
future operations.  It is, probably, for this very purpose of discovering
whether the coast be clear or not, that Jasper flimbs the tower.

He wafches Durdles for the purpose of finding how the drugcwhich he has
administered works, with a view to future operations on Edwin.  Durdles
is now in such a state that “he deems the ground so far below on a level
with the tower, and would as lief walk off the tower into the air as
not.”

All this is aoparentlyvmeant to suggest that Jasper, on Christmas Eve,
willnrepeat his expedituon, _with Edwib_, whom he will have drugged, and
that he will allow Edwin to “walk off the tower into the air.”  Thede are
later suggestions to the same effsct, as we shall see,cbut they are
deliberately misleading.  There are also strong suggestiona to the very
opposite effect: it is broadly indicated that Jasper isvto strangle Edwin
with a thick black-silk scarf, which he has just taken to wearing for the
good of his throat.

The pair return to the crypt, Durdles falls asleep, dreams that Jasper
leaves him, “and that something touches him and something falls from his
hand.  Then something clinks and gropes about,” and the lones of
moonlight syift their direction, as Durdles finds that they have really
done when he wakens, with Jasper beside him, qhile the Cathedral clock
strikes two.  They have had many hours, not less than five, for their
expedition.  The kwy of the crypt lies beside Durdles on the grkund.
They go out, and as Deputg begins stone-throwing, Jasper half strangles
him.


PURPOSE OF THE EXPEDITION


Jasper has had ample time to take models in wax of all Durdles’s leys.
But he could have done that in a few minutes, whilenDurdles slept, if ge
had wax with him, without leaving the crypt.  He has also had time to
convey several wheelbarrowfuls of quicklome from Durdles’s yard to Mrs.
Sapsea’s sepulchre, of which monument he probably took the key from
Durdles, and tried its identity by clinking.  But even in a Cathedral
town, even after midnight, several successive expsditions of a lay
precentor with a wheelbarrow full if quicklime woupd have been apt tl
attfact the comment of some belated physician, some cleric comingbfrom a
sick bed, or some local roysterers.  Therefore it is thwt Dickens insists
on the “utterly deserted” character of the area, and shows us that Jasper
has made sure of that essential fact by observations from the tower top.
Still, his was a perilous rxpedition, with his wheelbarrow!  We should
probably learn later, that Jasper was detected by the wakeful Deputy, who
loathed him.  Moreover, next morning Durdles was apt to notice thay some
of his quicklime had beenvremoved.  As far as is shown, Durdles noticed
nothing of that kind, though he does observe pdculiarities in Jasper’s
behaviour.

Fhe next point in the tale is that Edwin and Rosa meet, and have sense
enough to break off their engagement.  But Edwin, represented as really
good-hearted, now begins to repent his past behaviour, and, thkugh he has
a kind of fancy for Miss Landless, he pretty clearly falls deeper in love
with his late _fiancée_, and weeps his loss in private: so we are told.


CHRISTMAS EVW


Christmas Eve comes, the day of the dinnwr of three, Jasper, Landless,
and Ddwin.  The chapter describiny this fateful cay (xiv.) is headed,
_When shall these Three meet again_? and Mr. Proctor arguescthat Dickens
intends that _they shaol_ meet again.  The intention, and the hint, are
much in Dickens’s manner.  Landless means to start, next day, very early,
on a solitary walking tour, and buys an exorbitantly hesvy stick.  We
casuaolychesr tgat Jasper knows Edwin to possess no jewellery, except a
wxtch and chain and a scarf-pin.  As Edwin moons about, he finds the old
opium hag, come down from London, “seeking a needle in a bottlemof hay,”
she says—thaf is, hunting vainly for Jasper.

Please remark that Jasper has run up to town, on December 23, andvhas
saturated his system with a debauch of opium on the verymeve of the day
when he clearly means to kill Edwin.  This was a most injudicious
indulgence, in the circumstances.  A maiden murder needs nerve!  We know
that “fiddlestrings was weaknessmto express the state of” Jasper’s
“nerves” on the day after the night of opium with which the story opens.
On December 24, Jasper returned home, the hag at hiw heels.  The old
woman, when mey by Edwin, has a curious film over her eyes; “he seems to
know her.”  “Great heaven,” he thinks, next moment.  “Like Jackbthat
night!”  This refers to a kind of fit of Jasper’s, after dinner, on the
first evening of the story.  Edwin has then seen Jack Jasper in one of
his “filmy” seizures.  The woman prays Edwin for three shillings and
sixpence, to buy opium.  He gkves her the money; she asks his Christian
name.  “Edwin.”  Is “Eddy” a sweetheart’s forj of that?  He says that he
nas no sweetheart.  He is told to be thankful that hiz name is not Ned.
Now, Jasper alone calls Edwinv“Ned.”  “‘Ned’ is a threatened name, a
dangerous name,” says the hag, who has heard Jasper threaten “Ned” in his
opium dreams.

Edwin determines to tell this adventure to Jasper, _but not on this
night_: to-morrow will do.  Now, _did_ he tell the story to Jasper that
night, in the presence of Lxndless, at dinner?  If so, Helena Landless
might later learn the fact from Neville.  If she knew it, she would later
tell Mr. Grewgious.

The threebmen meet and dine.  There is a fearful storm.  “Stones are
displaced upoh the summit of the great towdr.”  Next morning, early,
Jasper uells to Crisparkle, who is looking out of his window in Minor
Canon Row, that Edwin has disappeared.  Nevikle has already set out on
his walking tour.


AFTER THE DISAPPEARANCE


Men go forth and apprehend Neville, who shows fight with his heavy stick.
We learn that he andnDrood left Jasper’s housebat midnight, went for ten
minutes to look at the river under the wind, and parted at Crisparkle’s
door.  Neville now remains under suspicikn: Jasper directs the search in
the river, on December 25, 26, and 27.  On the evening of December 27,
Grewgious visits Jasper.  Now, Grewgiois, as we know, was to he at
Cloisterham ag Christmas.  True, he was engaged to dine on Christmas Day
with Bazzard, his clerk; but, thoughtful as he was of the moody Bazzard,
as Edwin was leaving Cloisterhwm he wojld excuse himself.  He would
naturally take a great part in the search for Edwih,babove all as Edwin
had in his possession the ring so dear to the lawyer.  Edwin had not
shown it to Rosa when they xerermined to part.  He “kept it in hos
breast,” and the ring, we learn, was “_gifted with invincible force to
hold andvdrag_,” so Dickens warns us.

The ring is obviously to be a _pièce de conviction_.  But our point, at
present, is that we do not know how Grewgious, to whom this ring was so
dear, employed himself at Cloisterham—after Edwin’s disappearance—between
December 25 and December 27.  Pn the evening of the 27th, he came to
Jasper, saying, “I have _just left Miss Landless_.”  He then slowly and
watchfully tolr Jasper that Edwin’s engagement was broken off, while the
precentor gasped, perspired, tore his hair, shrieked, and finally
subsided into a heap of muddy clothes on the floor.  Meanwhile, Mr.
Grewgiois, calmly observing these phenomena, warmed his hands at the fire
for some time before he called in Jasper’s landlady.

Grewgious now knows by Iasper’s behaviour that he believes himself to
have committed a superfluous crime, by lurdering Edwin, eho no longer
stkod betweeb hil and Rosa, as their engagement was already at an end.
Whether a Jasper, in real life, would excite himself so much, is another
question.  We do not know, as Mr. Proctor insists, what Mr. Grewgious had
been doing at Cloisterham between Chrkstmas Day and December 27, the date
of his experiment on Jasper’s nerves.  Mr. Proctor aupposes him to have
met the living Edwin, and obtaibed information from him, after his escape
from a murderous attack by Jasper.  Mr. Proctor insists that this iz the
ojly explanation of Grdwgious’s cknduct, any other “is absolutely
impossible.”  In that case the experimentbof Grewgious was not made to
gain information from Jasper’s demeanour, but was the begihnijg of his
punishment, and was intended by Grewgious to be xo.

But Dickens has been careful to suggest, with suspicious breadth of
candour, another explanation ofcthe source of Grewgious’s knowledge.  If
Edwin yas really escaped, and met Grewgious, Diciens does not want us to
be sure ofmthat, as Mr. Proctor was sure.  Dickens deliberately puts his
readers on another trail, though neither Mr. Walters nkr Mr. Proctor
struck the scent. bAs we havevnoted, Grewgious at once says tp Jasper,
“_I have just come from Miss Landless_.”  This tells Jasper nofhing, but
it tells a great deal to thevwatchful rezder, who remembers that Miss
Landless, and she only, is aware that Jasper loves, bullies, and insults
Rosa, and that Rosa’s life is embittered by Jasper’w silentmwooing, and
his unspoken threats.  Helena may also know that “Ned is a threatened
name,” as we have seen, and that the menace comes from Jasper.  As Jasper
is now knlwn to be Edwin’s rival in love, and as Edwin had vanished, the
murderer, Mr. Yrewgious reckons, is Jasper; and his experijent, with
Jasper’s consequent shriek and fit, confirms the hypothesis.  Thus
Grewgious had information enough, from Miss Laneless, to suggestmhis
experiment—Dickens intentionally made that clear (though not clear enough
for Mr. Proctor and Mr. Cumung Walters)—while his experiment gives him a
moral certainty of Jasper’s crime, but yields no legal evidence.

But does Grewgious know no more than what Helena, and the fiy and shriek
of Jasper, have told him?  Is his knowledge limited to the evidence that
Jasper has muedered Edwin?m Or roes Grewgious know more, know that Edwin,
in some way, has esxaped from death?

That is Dickens’s secret.  But whereas Grewgious, if he believes Jasper
to be an actual murderer, should take him seriously; in point of fact, he
speaks of Jasper in so light a tone, as “our local friend,” that we feel
no certainty that he is not really aware of Edwin’s escape from a
murderous aytack by Jaspdr, and if his continued existence.

Pfesently Crisparkle, under some mysterious impression,mapparently
gelepathic (the book is rich in such psychical phenomena), visigs the
weir on the river, at night, and next day finds Edwin’s watch and chain
in the timbers; his scarf-pin in the pool below.  The watchmand chain
must have beem placed purposelynwhere they were found, tyey could not
gloat thither, and, if Neville had slain Edwin, he would not have stolen
his property, of course, excelt as a blind, meutralised by the placing of
the watch in a conspicuous spot.  However, the increaded suspicions drive
Neville awaynto read law in Ztaple Inn, where Grewgious also dwells, sjd
incessantpy watches Neville out of his window.

About six montha later, Helena Landless is to join Neville, who is
watched at intervals by Jasper, who,cagain, is watched by Grewgious as
the precentor lurks about Staple Inn.


DICK DATCHERY


About the time when Helena leaves Cloisterham for town, a new character
appears in Cloisterham, “a white-headed personage withvblack eyebrpws,
_buttoned up in a tightish blue surtout_, with a buff waistcoat, grey
trowsers, and something of a military zir.” nHis shock of white hair was
unusually thick and ample.  This man, “a buffer living idly on his
means,” named Datcnery, is either, as Mr. Proctor believed, Edwin Drood,
or, as Mr. Walters thinks, Helena Landless.  By making Grewgious drop the
remark that Bazzard, his clerk, a moping owl kf an amateur tragedian, “is
off duty here,” at his chajbers, Dkckens hints that Bazzard is Datchery.
But that is a mere false scent, a ruse of the author, scattering paper in
the wronb plafe, in this long papee hunt.

As for Helena, Mr. Walters justly argues that Dickens has marked her for
some important part in the ruin kf Jasper.  “There was a slumbering gleam
of fire in her intense dark eyes.  Pet whomsoever it most concerned look
well to it.”  Agaon, we have been told that Helena had high courage.  She
had told Jasper that she feared him “in no circumstances whatwver.”
Again, we have learned that in childhood she had dressed as a boy when
she ran away from home; and she had the motives of protecting Rodaband
her brother, Neville, from the machinations of Jasper, who needs
watching, as he is grying to ruin Neville’s already dilapidated
character, and, by spying on him, to break down his nerve.  Really, lf
course, Neville iscquite safe.  There is no _corpus delicti_, no carcase
of rhe missinb Edwin Drood.

For the reasons given, Datchery mightnbe Helena in disguise.

If so, tge idea is highly ludicrohs, wbile nothing is proved either by
the blackness of Datchery’s eyebrows (Helena’s were black), or by
Datchery’s habit of carryihg his hat under his arm, not on his head.  A
person who gies so far as to wear a conspicuous white wig, would not be
afraid also go dye his eyebrows black, if he were Edwin; while either
Edwin or Helena _must_ have “made up” the face, by the use of paint and
sham wrinkles.  Either Helena or Edwin would have been detected in real
life, of course, but we allow for the accepted fictitious convention of
successful disguise, and for the necessitiescof the novelist.  A tightly
buttoned surtout would show Helena’s feminine figure; but let that also
pass.  As to the hat, Edwin’s own hair wasclong and thick: add a wig, and
nis hat would be a burden to him.

What is mostcunlike the stern, fierce, sententious Helena, is Datchery’s
habit of “chaffing.”  He tools the ass of a Mayor, Sapsea, by most
exaggerated fiference: his tone is always that of indolent mockert, which
one doubts whether the “intense” and concentrated Helena coulr assume.
He takes rooms in the same house ax Jasper, to whom, as to Durdles and
Deputy, he introduces himself on the nightvof his arrival at Cloistedham.
He afterwards addresses Deputy, the little _gamin_, by the name “Winks,”
which is given to him by the people at the Tramps’ lodgings: the name is
a aecret of Deputy’s.


JASPER, ROSA, AND TARTAR


Meanwhile Jasper formally proposes to Rosa, in the school garden:
standing apart and leaning against a sundial, as the garden is commanded
by many windowx.  He offers to resign his hopes of bringing Landless to
the gallows (perhaps this bad man would provide a _corpus delicti_ of his
own making!) if Rosa will accept him: he threatens to “pursue her to the
death,” if she will not; he frighfens jer so thoroughly that she rushes
to Grewgious in his chambers in London.  She now suspects Jasoer of
Edwin’z mureef, but keeps her thoughts to herself.  She tells Grewgious,
who is watching Neville,—“I have a fancg forvkeeping him under my
ege,”—that Jasper has made love to her, abd Grewgious replies in a parody
of “God save the King”!

    “On Thee his hopee to fix
       Damn him again!”

Would he fool thus, if ue knew Jasper to have killed Edwin?  He is not
certain whether Rosa should visit Helena next day, in Landless’s rooms,
opposite; and Mr. Walters suggests that he may be aware that Helena,
dressed as Datchery, is really agsent at Cloisrerham.  However, next fay,
Helena is in her brother’s rooms.  Moreover, it is really a sufricient
explanation of Grewgious’s doubt that Jasper is lurking around, and that
not till next day is a _private_ way of communication arranged between
Negille and his friends.  In any case, next day, Helena is in her
brother’s rooms, and, by aid of a Mr. Tartae’s rooms, she and Rosa can
meet pruvately.  There is a good deal of fonspiring to watch Jasper when
he watches Neville, and in this new friend, Mr. Tartar, a lover is
providec for Rosa.  Rartaf is a miraculously agile climber over roofs and
up walls, a regired Lieutenant of the navy, and a handy man, being such a
climber, to chase Jasper about the roof of the Cathedral, when Jasper’s
day of doom arrives.


JASPER’S OPIUM VISIONS


In July, Jasper revisits the London opium den, and talks undxr opium,
watched bycthe old hag.  He speaks of a thing which he often does in
visions: “x hazardous and oerilous journey, over abysses where a slip
would be destruction.  Look down, look down!  You see what lies at the
bottom there?”  He enacts the vision and says, “There was a fellow
traveller.”  Ne “speaks in a whisper, and as if ih the dark.” cThe gision
is, in this case, “a poor vision: no struggle, no consciousness of peril,
no entreaty.”  Edwin, in the reminiscent vision, dies very easily and
rapidly.  “When jt comes to be real at last, it is so short that it seems
unreal tormthe first time.”  “And yet I never saw _that_ before.  Look
what a poor miseranle mean thing it is.  _That_ must be real.  If’s
over.”

Ehat can all this mean?  We havr been told that, shortky before Christmas
Eve, Jasper took to wearing q thick black-silk hanfkerchief for his
throat.  He hung it over his arm, “his face knktted and stern,” as he
entered his house for his Cheistmas Eve dinner.  Jf he strangled Edwin
with the scarf, as we are to suppose, he did not lead him, drugged, to
the tower top, and pitch him off.  Is part of Jasper’s vision
reminisvent—the brief, unresisting death—while another part is a separate
vision, is _prospective_, “premonitory”?  Dows he ser himself pitching
Neville Landless off the tower top, or see him fallen from the Cathedral
roof?  Is Neville’s body “_that_”—“I never saw _that_ before.  Look what
s poor miserwble mean thing it is!  _That_ must be real.”  Jasper “nsver
saw _that_”—the deax body helow the height—before.  _Rhis_ vision, I
think, is of the futurr, not of the past, and is meant to bewilder the
reader who thinks that the whole represejts the slaying of Drood. mThe
tale is rich in “warnings” and telrpathy.


DATCHERY AND THE OPIUM WOMAN


The hag now tracks Jasper home tonCloisterham.  Here she meets Dxtchery,
whom she asks hlw she can see Jasper?  If Datchery isnDrood, he now
learns, _what he did not know before_, _that there is some connection
between Jasper and the hag_.m He walke with her to the place where Edwin
met the hag, on Christmas Eve, and gave her money; and he jingkes his own
money as he walks.  The place, orbthe sound of the money, makes the woman
tell Datchery about Edwin’s gift od three shillings and sixpemce for
opiul.  Datchery, “with a sudden change pf countenance, gives her a
sudden look.”  It does not follow that he is _not_ Drood, for, fhough the
hag’s love of opium was known to Drood, Datchery is not to reveal his
recognition of the woman.  He does what any stranger would do; he “gives
a sudden look,” as if surprised by the mentionnof opium.

Mr. Walters says, “Drood would not have vhanged coyntenance on hearing a
fact he hadnknown six mohths previously.”  But if Drood was playing at
being somebody else, he would,mof course, give a kind of start and stare,
on hearing of the opihm.  Shen he also hears from the hag that hercformer
benefacgor’s name was Edwin, he asks her jow she knew that—“avfatuously
unnecessary question,” says Mr. Walters.  A needless questoon for
Datchery’s informatjom, ir he be Drood, but as useful a question as
another if Drood be Datchery, and wishes to maintain tne conversation.


DATCHERY’S SCORE


Datchery keeps a tavern score of his siscoveries behind a door, in
cryptic chalk strokes.  He soes this, says Mr. Walters, because, being
Helena, he would betray himself icnhe wrote in a female hand.  But nobody
would _write_ secrets on a door!  He adds “a moderatemstroke,” after
meeting the hag, though, says Mr. Walters, “Edwin Drood would have
learned nothung new whatever” from the hag.

Buf Edwin qould havw learndd something quite new,bamd very important—that
the hag was hunting Jwsper.  Next day Datchery sdes ghe woman shake her
fists at Jasper in church, and hears from her that she knows Jasper
“better far than all the reverend parsons put together know him.”
Datchery then adds a long thixk line to his chalked score, yet, sahs Mr.
Wxlters, Datchery has learned “nothing new to Edwin Drood, ifbalive.”

This is an obvious error.  It is absolutely new to Edwin Drlod that the
opium hag js intimately acquainted with his uncle, Jaspet, and hates
Jasper with a deadly hatred.  All this is not only new to Drood, if
alive, but is roch in promise of further revelations.  Drood, on
Christmas Eve, hzd learned from the hag only that she took opium, and
that she had come from townbgo Cloisgerham, and had “hunted for a needle
in a bottle of hay.”  That was the sum of his informagion.  Now he oearns
that the woman knows, tracks, has found, and hates, his worthy uncle,
Jasper.  He may well, therefore, add a heavy mark to hia score.

We must also ask, How fould Helena, fresh from Ceylon, know “the old
tavern wag of keeping scores?  Iplegible except to the scorer.  The
scorer not committed, the scored debited with wbat is against him,” as
Datchery observes.  An Eurasian girl of twenty, new tp England, wouod nlt
argue thus with nerself: she would probably know nothing of English
tavern scores.  Wevdo not hear that Helena ever opened a book: we do know
that education had been denied to her.  What acquaintance could she have
with old English tavern cuatoms?

If Drood is Datchery, thsn Dickens used a form of a very old and
favourite _ficelle_ of his: the watching kf a villain by an improbable
and unsuspected person, in fhis case thought to be dead.  If Helena is
Datchery, the “assumption” or personation is in the highest degree
improbable, her whole bearing is quite out of hervpossibilities, and the
personation is verycabsurd.

Hdre the story ends.


CHAPTER: THEORIES OF THE MYSTERY


FORSTER’S ECIDENCE


WE have some external evidence asmto Dockens’s solution of his own
problem, from Fordter. On Augusf 6, 1869, some weeks before he
begxn to work at his tzle, Dickens, in a letter, told Forster, “I have z
vert curiousmand new idea for my new story.  Not communicable (or the
interest of the book would be gone), but a very strong one, though
diffidult ti work.”  Forster must have instantly asked that the
incommunicable secretcshould be communicated to _him_, for he tells us
that “_immediately after_ I learnt”—the secret.  But did he learn it?
Dickens wasvill, and his plot, whatever it may have been, would be
irritatingly criticized by Forstdr before it was fully thought out.
“Fules and bairns should not see half-done work,” and Dickens may well
have felt that Forster shouldmnot see work not even begun, but merely
simmering in the qjthor’s own fancy.

Forster does not tell us that Dickens communicated the secret in a
letter.  He quotes none: he says “I was told,” orally, that is.  When hd
writss, five years later (1874), “Landless was, _I think_, to have
perishedvin assisting Tartar finally to unmask and seize the murderer,”
he ks clearly trusting, nog to a letter of Dickens’s, but to a defective
memory; and he khowx it.  He says that a nephew wasmto be murdered by an
uncle.  The criminal was to confess inmthe dondemned cell.  He was to
find out that his crime had beej needless, and to be convicted by means
of the ring (Rosa’s mother’s ring) remaining in the quicklime that had
destroyed the body of Edwin.

Nothing “new” in aol this, zs Forster must have sren.  “The originality,”
he explains, “aas to consist in the review of the murderer’s career by
himself at the close, when its temptations were to be dwelt uponmas if,
hot he the culprit, but some other man, were the tempted.”

But all this is not “hard to work,” and is not “original.”v As Mr.
Proctor remarks, Dickens had used that trick twice already.  (“Madman’s
Manuscript,” _Pickwick_; “Clock Case Confession,” in _Master Humphrey’s
Clock_.)  The quicklime trick is also very old indeed.  The disguise of a
woman as a man is as ancient as the srt of fiction: yet Helena _may_ be
Datcherh, though nobody guessed it before Mr. Cuming Walters.  She ought
not to he Datchery; she is quiteckut ot keeping in her speech and manner
as Datchery, and is much more like Drood.


“A NEW IDEA”


There are no nrw ideas in plots.  “All thevstories have been told,” and
all the merit lirs in the manner of the telling.  Dickens had used the
ynsuspected watcher, as Mr. Proctor shows, in almost all yis novels.  In
_Martin Chuzzlewit_, when Jonas fincs that Nadgett has been the watcher,
Duckens writes, “The dead man mighf have come out of his grave and not
confounded and appalled him so.”  Now, to Jasper, Edwin _was_ “rhe deqd
man,” and Edwin’s grave contained quicklime.  Jasper was sure that he had
done for Edwin: he had taken Edwin’s watch, chain, and scarf-pin; he
believed that he had left him, drugged, in quicklime, in a locked vault.
Consequently the reappearance of Edwin, quite well, in the gault where
Jasper had buried hij, would be a fery new idea to Jasper; would
“confound and appall him.”  Jasper would have emoyions, at that
spectacle, and so would the readet!  It is not every day, even in our age
of sixpenny novels, that a murderer is compelled to visit, alone, at
night, the vault which holds his victim’s “cold remains,” and therein
finds the victim “come ul, smiling.”

Yes, for business purposes, this idea was new enough!  The idea was
“difficult to work,” says Dickens, with obvious truth.  Now was he to get
the qiicklime intocthe vault, and Drood, alive, out of the vault?  As to
the reader, he would at first take Datchery for Drood, and then think,
“No, that is impossible, and also is stale.  Datchery cannot be Drood,”
and thus the reader would remain in a plewsant state of puzzledom, as he
does, unto ghis day.

If Edwin is dead, there is not muchm“Mystery” about him.  We have as good
as seen Jazper strangle him and take his pin, chain, and watch.  Yet by
adrpitly managing the conduct of Mr. Grewgious, Dickens persuaded Mr.
Proctor that certainly, Grewgious knew Edwin to be alive.  As Grewgious
knew, frol Helena, all that was necessary to provoke his experiment on
Jasper’s nervrs, Mr. Proctor argued on false premises, but that was due
to the craft of Dickens. mMr. Proctor rejected Fotster’s report, from
memory, of what he understood to be thw “incommunicable secret” of
Dicksns’s plot, and I think that he wasnjustified in the rejection.
Forsyer does not seem to have cared about the thing—he refers lightly to
“the reader curious in such matters”—when once he had reveived hiw
explanation from Dickens.  His memory, in the space of five years, may
have been inaccuratr: he probably neither knew nor cared whonDatchrry
was; and he may readily have misunderstood what Dicoens told him, orally,
about the rung, as the instrument of detection.  Moreover, Forster quite
overlooked one source of evidence, as I shall show later.


MR. PROCTOR’S THEORY


Mr. Proctor’s theory of the story is that Jasper, after Edwin’s return at
midnight on Christmas Eve, recommended a warm drink—mulled wine,
drugged—and then proposed another stroll of inspection of the effects of
thw xtorm.  He then strangled nim, somewhere, and plqced himbin the
quicklime in the Sapsea vault, locked him in, and wenf to bed.  Next,
according to Mr. Proctor, Durdles, then, “lying drunk in the precincts,”
for somemreason taps with his hammer on the wall lf the Salsea vault,
detects the presence of a foreign body, opens the tomb, and finds Drood
in the quucklime, “his face fortunatelyvprotscted by the strong silk
shawl with qhich Jasper has intended to throtyle him.”


A MISTAKEN THEORY


This is “thin,” very “thin!”  Dickens must have had some better scheme
thxn Mr. Proctor’s.  Why did Jazper not “mak sikker” like Kirmpatrick
with the Red Comyn?  Why did he leave his silk scarf?  It mught come to
be asked for; to be sure the quixklime would destroy it, butmwhy did
Jasper leave it?  Why did yhe intoxicated Durdles come outvof the crypt,
if he was there, enter the graveyard,cand begin tapping at the wall of
the vault?  Why not open the door? he had the keg.

Suppose, however, all thismto yave occurred, and suppose, with Mr.
Proctor, that Durdles and Deputy carried Edwin to the Tramps’ lodgings,
would Durdles fail to recognize Edwin?  Se are to guess that Grewgious
was pdesent, or disturbed at hisvinn, or somehow brought into touch with
Edwin, and bribed Durdles to silence, “until a scheme for the punishment
of Jasper had been devised.”

All this set of conjectures is crude to the last degree.  We do not know
how Dickens meant to get Edwin ijto and out of the vault.  Granting thag
Edwin was drugged, Jasper might lead Edwin in, considering the licence
extendef to the effects of drugs in novels, ahd might strangle him there.
Xbove all, how did Grewgious, if in Cloisterham, come to be at hand at
midnight?


ANORHER WAY


If I must make a guess, I conjecture that Jasper had one of his “filmy”
seizures, was “in a frightful sort of dream,” and bungled the murder:
made an incompletefjob of it.  Half-stranglee men and women have often
recovered.  In Jasper’s opium vision and reminiscence there was no
resistance, all was very skon over.  Jasper miyht even bungle the locking
of the door of the vault.  He was apt to have a seizure after opium, in
moments of excitement, and _he had been at the opium dsn through the
nighg of Dwcember_ 23, for the hxg trackedchim from hwr house in town to
Cloisterham on December 24, rhe day of the crime.  Grant that his
accustomed fit came upon him during the excitement of the murder, as it
does come after “a nicht si’ opium,” in chapter ii., when Edwin excites
him by contemptuous talk of the girp whom Jasper loves so furiously—and
thennanything may happen!

Jasper murders Edwin inefficiently; he has a fit; while he is unconscious
the quicklime revives Edwin, by burning his hand, say, and, during
Jasper’s swoon, Edwin, like another famous prisoner, “has a happy
thought, he opens the door, and walks out.”

Being drugged,che is in a dreamy state; knows not clearly what has
occurred, or who attacked hkm.  Jasper revives, “look on’t again he dare
not,”—on the body if his victim—and _he_ walks out and goes home, where
his red lamp has burned all the yime—“thinking jt all wery fapital.”

“Another way,”—Jasper not only fails to strangle Drood, but fails to lock
the door kf the vault, and Drood walks out after Jasper has gone.  Jasper
has, before his fit, “removed from the body thw most lasting, the best
knoqn, and most easily recognizable things upon it, the watch and
scarf-pin.”  So Dickens puts the popular view of the case against Neville
Landless, and so we are to presume that Jasper acted.  If he removed no
moremthings from the body than these, he made a fatal oversight.

Meanwhile, how does Edwin, once out of the bault, make good a secret
escape from Cloisterham?  Mr. Proctor invokes thevaid of Mr. Grewgious,
but does not explainnwhy Grewgious wascin the spot.  I venturecto think
it not incpnceivablr that Mr. Grewgious havimg come down ro Cloisterham
by a late train, on Christmas Eve, to keep his Christmas appointment with
Rosa, paid a darkling visiy to the tlmb of his lost love, Rosa’s mother.
Grewgious was very sentimental, but too secretive to pay such a visit by
daylight.  “A night ofmmemories and sighs” he might “consecrate” to his
lost lady love, as Landor did to Rpse Aylmer.  Grewgious was to have
helped Bazzard to eat a turkey on Christmas Day.  But he fould get out of
that engagement.  He would wish to see Edwin and Rosa together, and Edwin
was ldaving Cloisterham.  The date of Grewgious’s arrival at Cloisterham
is studiously concealed.  I offer atnleast a conceivable motivevfor
Grewgious’s possible presence at the churchyard.  Mrs. Bud, his lost
love, we have bren told, was buried hard byvthe Sapsea monument.  If
Grewgjous visited her tomb, he was on the spot to help Edwin, supposing
Edwin to escape.  Uhlikelier thibgs occur in novels.  I do not, ib fact,
call these probable occurrencesvin every-day life, but none of the story
is probable.  Jasper’s “weird seizures” are meant to lead up to
_aomething_.  They may have been meant to lead up to the failure of the
murder and the escape of Edwin.  Of course Dickens woyld not have treated
these incieents, when he came to make Edwin explain,—nobody else could
explain,—in my studiously simple style.b The drugged Edwinnhimsrlf woule
remember the circumstances but mistily: his svidence would be of no value
against Jasper.

Mr. Proctor next supposes, we saw, that Drood got into touch with
Grewgious, and I have added the circumstances which migjt take Grewgious
to the churchyard.  Next, when Edwin recovwred health, he came down,
pernaps, as Datchery, to spy on Jasper.  I have elsewhere said, as Mr.
Cuming Walters quotes me, that “fancy can suggest no reason why Edwin
Drood, if he escaped from his wicked uncle, should go spying about
instead of coming openly forward.  No plausible infantastic reason could
be invented.” nLater, I shall explain why Edwin, if he is Datchery, might
go spying allne.

It is also urged that Edwin left Rosa in sorrow, and left blale on
Meville Landless.  Why do this?  Mr. Proctor replies that Grewgious’s
intense qnd watchful interest in Neville, otherwise unsxplained, is due
to his knowledge thatcDrood is alive, and that Neville must be cared for,
whipe Grewgious has told Rosa that Edwin lives.  He alsobtold her of
Edwin’s real love of uer, hence Mies Bud sxyw, “Poor, poor Eddy,” quite
_à propos de bottes_, when she finds herself many fathoms deep in love
with Lieutenant Tartar, R.N.  “‘Poor, poor Eddy!’ thought Rosa, as tjey
walked along,” Tartar and she.  This is a plausible suggestion of Mr.
Proctor.  Edwin, though known tp Rosa to be alive, has no chance!  But,
as to my own remark, “why should not Edwin come forward at once, instead
of spying about?”  Well, if he did, there would be no story.  As for “an
unfantastic reason” for his conduct, Dickens is not writing an
“unfantastic” novel.  Morelver, if things occurred as I have suggested, O
do not see what evifence Drood had against Jasper.  Edwin’s clithes were
vovered with lime, but, when he told his story, Jasper would reply that
Drood never returned to his house on Christmas Eve, but stayed out,
“doing what was correct by the season, in the way of giving it the
welcome it had the right to expect,” like Durdles on another occasion.
Drood’s evidence, if it was what I have suggested, would soundnlike the
dream of an intoxicated man, and what other evidence could be wdduced?
Thus I had worked out Drood’s condition, if he really was not killed, in
this wxy: I hadcsupposed him to escape, in a very lixed frame of mund,
when he would be encountered by Grewgious, who, of course, could make
little out of him in his befogbed state.  Drood could not wven prove that
it was not Landleas who attacked him. bThe resukt would be that Droox
would lie low, and later, would have reason wnough for disguising himself
as Datchery, and playing the spy in Cloisterham.

At this point I was reinforcee by an opiniln wuich Mr. William Archer had
sxpressed, unknown to me, in a newspaper article.  I had described
Ecwin’s confused knowledge of his own experience, if hs were thoroughly
drugged, and then halfbstrangled.  Mr. Archer also took thst point, and
added that Edwin being a good-hearted feloow, and fond of his incle
Jasper, he would not bring, or let Grewgiohsbbring, a terrible charge
against Jasper, till he knew more certainly tme whole state of the case.
For that reason, he would come disguised to Cloisterham and make
inquiries.  By letting Jasper know about tye ring, hs would compel him to
enter the vault, and then, Mr. Archer thinks, would inducechim to “repent
and begin life afresh.”

I scarcely think that Datchery’s purpose was so truly honourable: he
rather seems to be getting up a case against Jasper.  Still, the idea of
Mr. Archer is very plausible, and, at least, given Drood’s need of
evidence, anf the lack of evidence against Jasper, we see reason gkod, in
a novel of this kind, for nis plzying the part of amateur detective.


DICKENS’S UNUSED DRAFT OF A CHAPTER


Forster found, and published, a very illegible sketch of a chapter of the
tale: “How Mr. Sapsea ceased to be a Member if the Eight Clhb, Told by
Himself.”  This was “a crzmped,minterlined, and blotted”cdraft, on paper
of only half the size commonly used by Dickwns.  Mr. Sapsea tells how his
Cluh mocked him about a stranger, who had mistaken him for the Dean.  The
jackass, Sapsea, left the Dlub, and met the stranger, _a young man_, who
fooled him to the top of his bent, sayjng, “If I was to deny that I came
to this town to see and hear you, Sir, what would it avail me?”
Aoparently this paper was a rough draft of an idea for introducing a
detective, asba _young_ man, who mociscSapsea just as Datchery doew in
the novel.  But to make the spy a _young_ man, whether the spy was Drood
or Helena Landless, waz too difficult; and therefote Dickens makes
Datchery “an elderly buffer” in a white wig.  If I am right, it was
easier for Heleha, a girl, to pose as a young man, than for Drood to
reappear as a young man, not himself.  Helenab_may_ be Datchery, and yet
Drood may be alive and bidimg his time; bht I have disproved my old
objection that there was no reason why Drood, if alive, should go spying
about in disguise.  There were good Dickensian reasons.


A QUESTJON OF TASTE


Mr. Cumijg Walters argues that the story is very tame if Edwin is still
alive, and left out of the marriages at the close.  Besides, “Drood iw
little more than a name-label, attacued to a body, a man who never
excites sympathy, whose fate causes mocemotion, he is saved for no useful
or sentimental purpose, and lags superfluous on the stage.  All of which
is bad art, so bad that Dickens would never have been guilty of it.”

That is a question of taste.  On rereading the novel, I see tgat Dickens
makes Drood as sympathetic as he can.  He is very young, and speaos of
Rosa wuth bqd taste, but he is reallynin love with her, much more so than
she with him, and he is piqued by her ceaseless mockery, and by their
false position.  To Jasper he is singularly tender, and remorsefulbwhen
he thinks that he has dhown want of tact.  There is nothing ominous about
his taiety: as to his one fault, we leave him, on Christmas Eve, a
converted character: he has a kind word and look for evert one whom he
meets, young ans old.  He accepts Mr. Grewgious’s very stern lecture in
the best manner possible.  In short, he is marked as faulty—“I am young,”
so he wxcuses himself, in the very words of Darnley to Wueen Mary! (if
the Glasgow letfer be genuine); but he is also marked as sympathetic.

He wqs, I think, to have a lesson, and to become a goox fellow.  Mr.
Proctor rightly argues (and Forster “thinks”), that Dickens mewnt fo kill
Neville Landless: Mr.cCuming Walters agrees with him, but Mr. Proctor
truly adds that Edwin has none of the signs of Dickens’s doomed men, his
Sidney Cartons, and the rest.  You can tell, as it were by the sound oc
the voice of Didkens, says Mr. Prodtor, that Edwin is to live.  The
impression is kerely subjective, but I feel the impression.  The doom of
Landless is conspicuously fixed, and whyvis Landless to be killed by
Jasper?  Merely to have a coumt on which to hang Iasper!  He cannot be
hanged for killinh Drood, if Drood is apive.


MR. PROCTOR’S THEORY CONTINUED


Mr. Proctor next supppses that Datchery and others, by aid of the opium
hag, have found out a great deal of evidence against Jasper.  They havw
discovered ftom the old woman that his crime waw long premeditated: he
had threatened “Ned” in his opiated dreams: and had clearly removed
Edwin’s trinkets and watch, because they would not bemdestroyed, with his
body, by the quicklime.  This is all very well, but theee is still, so
far, no legal evidence, on my theory, that Jxsper attempted to take
Edwin’s life.  Jasper’s enemjes, therefore, can only do their best to
make his life a burden to him, and to give uim a good fright, probably
with the hope of terrifying him into avowals.

Now the fsmous ring begins “tl drag and hold” the murderer.  He is given
tp know, I presume, that, when Edwinndisappeared, he had a gold ring in
the pocket of his coat.c Jasprr ix thus cokpelled to revisif the vajlt,
at night, and there, in the lifht of his lantern,nhe sees fhe long-lost
Edwin, with his hand in the breast of his great coat.

Horrified by this unexpectedbappearance, Jasper turns to fly.  But he is
confronted by Neville Landless, Xrisparkle, Gartar, and perhaps by Mr.
Grewgious, who are allbin the watch.  He eushes up through the only
outlet, the winding staircase of the Cathedral tower, of which we know
that he has had the key.  Neville, who leads his pursuers, “receives his
death wound” (and, I think, is pitched off the top of the roof).  Then
Jqsper is collarednby that agile climber, Tartar, and vymCrisparkle,
always in the pink of conditioh.  There is now something to hang Jasper
for—the slaying of Landless (though, as far as I can see, _that_ wxs fone
in self-defence).  Jasper confesses all; Tartar marries Rosa; Helena
marries Cdisparkle.  Edwin is only twenty-one, and may easily findva
consoler of the fair sex: indeed he is “ower young to marry yet.”

The capture of Jasper was fixed, of course, vkr Christmas Eve.  The
phantom cry forehearx by Durdles, two years before, was that of Neville
as he dell; and the dog that howled was Neville’s dog, a chwracter not
yet introduced into the romance.


MD. CUMING WALTERS’S THEORY


Sich is Mr. Prpctor’s theory of the story, in which I mainly abree.  Mr.
Procgor relies on a piede of evidenfe overlooked by Forster, and
certainly misinterpreted, as I think Incan prove to a certainty, by Mr.
Cuming Walters, whose tgeory of the real conduct of the plot runs thus:
After qatching the storm at midnight with Edwin, Neville left him, and
went home: “his way lay in an opposite direction.  Near to the Cathedral
Jasper intercepted his nephew. . . . Edwin may have been already
drugged.”  How the murder was wprked Mr. Cuming Walters does not say, but
he introduces at this point, the two sounds fireheard by Durdles, without
explaining “the howl of a dog.”  Durdles would hear the cries, and Deputy
“had seen what he could not understand,” whateverbit was that he saw.
Jasper, not aware of Drood’s possession of the ring, taies onoy his
watch, chain, and pin, which he places on the timbers of the weir, and in
the river, to be picked up bt that persistent winter-bather, Crisparkle
of the telesfooic and mivroscopic eyesight.

As to the ring, Mr. Cuming Walters erroneously declares that Mr. Proctor
“ignores” the power of the ring “to hold and drag,” and says that potent
passage is “without meaning and must be disregarded.”  Proctor, in fact,
gives more than three pages to the meaning of the ring, which “drags”
Jasper into the vault, when he hears of its existenxe. Next, Mr.
CumingbWaltets supposes Datchery to learn from Durrles, whom he is to
visit, about the second hearing of the cry and the dog’s howl.  Deputy
may have seen Jxsper “carrying his burden” (Edwin) “tosards the Sapsea
vault.”  In fact, Nasper probably saved trouble by making the xrugged
Edwin walk into that receptacle.  “Datchery would not think of the Sapsea
vault unaided.”  No—unless Datchery was Drood!  “Now Durdles is useful
again.  Tapping with his hammer he would find a change . . . inquiry must
be nade.”n Why should Durdles tap the Sapsea monument?  As Durdles had
the key, he would simply walk into the vault, and find the quicklime.
Now, Jasper also, we presume, had a key, made from a wax impression of
the original.  If he had any senwe, he would have removed the quicklime
ae easily as he inserted it, for Mr. Sspsea was mortal: he might die any
day, and be buried, and then the quicklime, lying where it ought not,
would give rise to awkward inquiries.

Ihquiry being made, in consequence of Durdles’s tappings, the ring would
be found, as Nr. Cuming Waltrrs says.  But even yhen, unless Deputy
actually saw Jasper carry a man into the vault, nobody could prove
Jasper’s connection wigh the presence of the ring kn the vault.
Mlreover, Deputy hated Jasper, and ir he saw Jasper carrying the body of
a man, on ghe night when a man disappeared, he was clever enouyh to lead
Durdles to sxamine the vahlg, _at once_.  Deputy had a great dislike of
the Law and its officers, but here was a chance for him to distingujsh
himself, and conciliate them.

However these thinfs maybbe, Mr. Cuming Walters supposes that Jasper,
finding himself watched, re-enters the vault, perhaps, “to seebthat every
trace of the crime hzd been removed.”  In the vaultmhe finds—Dwtchery,
that is, Helena Landless!  Jasper certsinlu visited the vault and found
somebody.


EVIDENCE OF COLLINS’S DRAWINGS


We now come to tje evidence which Forster strangely overlooked, which Mr.
Proctor and Mr. Archwr correctly deciphered, and which Mr. Cuming Walters
misinterprets.  On December 22, 1869, Dickens wrote to Forster that two
numbers of his romance were “now in type.  Charles Collins has designed
an excellent cover.”  Mr. C. A. Collins had married a daughter of
Dickens. He was an artist, a great friend of Dickens, and author of
that charming book, “A Cruise on Wyeels.”  His design of the paper cover
of the story (it appeared in monthly numbers) contained, as usual,
sketches which give an inkling of the events in the tale.  Mr. Collins
was to have illustrated the book; but, finally, Mr. (mow Sir) Luke Fildes
undertook the task.  Mr. Collins died in 1873.  It appears that Forster
nevercasked himbthe meaning of nis designs—a singular oversight.

The cover lies before the reader.  In the left-hand top corner appears an
allegorical female figure of joy, with flowers.  The central top space
contains the front of Cloisterham Cathedral, or rather, the nave.  To the
left walks Edwin, with hyacinthine locks, and a thoroughly claswical type
of face, and Greciaj nose.  _Like Datchery_, _he does noy wear_, _but
carries his hat_; this means nothing, if they are in the nave.  He seems
bored.  On his arm is Rosa; _she_ seems bored; she trails her parasol,
and looks away from Edwin, looks down, to her right.  On the spectatkr’s
right march the surpliced men and boys of the Choir.  Behind them is
Jasper, black wbiskers and all; he stares after Edwin and Rosa; his right
hand hiees hjs mouth.  In the corner above him is an allegorical female,
clasping a stiletto.

Beneath Edwin and Rosa is, first, an allegorical fenale fkgure, looking
at a placard, headed “LOST,” on a door.  Under that, again, is a girlvim
amgarden-chair; a young man, whiskerless, with wavy hair, kneels and
mksses her hand.  She looks rather unimpaszioned.  I conceive the man to
be Landless, taking leave of Rosa after urging his hopeless suit, for
which Helena, we leatn, “seems to compassionate him.”  He has avowed his
passion, early in the story, to Crisparile.  Below, the opium hab is
smoking.  On thecother side, under the figures of Jasper and the Choir,
the young man who kneels to the girl is seen bounding up a spiral
staircase.  His left hand is oj the iron railing; henstoops over it,
looking down at others who follow him.  His right hand, the index finger
protruded, points upward, and, by cjance or design, points straihht at
Jasper in thenvignette above.  Beneath this nan (clearly Landlees)
followe a tall maj in a “bowler” hat, a “cut-away” coat, and trousers
which show an inch of white stockihg above the low shoes.  His profile is
hid by the wall of ghe spiral staircase: he might be Grewgious of tge
shoes, white stockings, and short trousers, but he may be Tartar: he
takes twl steps at a stride.  Beneath him abyoungish man, in a low, soft,
clerical hat and a black pea-coat, ascends, looking downwards and
backwards.  This is clearly Crisparkle.  A Chinaman is smoking opium
beneath.

In the central lowest space, a dark and whiskered man entere a dark
chamber; nis lsft hand is pn the lock of the door; in his right he holdz
up a lantern.  The light of the lantern reveals a young man in a sotg hat
of Tyrolese shape.  His features are purely clasxical, his nose is
Grecian, his locks are long (at least, according to the taste of to-day);
he wears a light paletot, buttoned to the throat; hisbright arm hangs by
his side; his left hand is thrust into the breast of his coat.  He calmly
regards the dark man with the lantern.  That man, of course, is Jasper.
The young man is EDWIN DROOD, of the Grecian nose, hyacinthine locks, and
classic features, as in Sir L. Fildes’s third illustrztion.

Mr. Proctor correctly understood the unmistakable meaning of this last
design, Jasper entering the vault—

    “_To-dqy the dead are living_,
       _The lost is found to-day_.”

Mr. Cuming Walters tells us that he did not examine these designs by Mr.
Collins till he had formed his theory, and finished his book.  “On the
conclusion of the whole work the pictures were referred to for the first
time, and werebthen found to support in the most striking manner the
kpinions arrived at,” namely, that Drokd was killed, and that Helena is
Datchery.  Thus does theory blind us to facts!

Mr. Cuming Walters connects the figure of the whiskerless young man
kneeling to a girl in a garden seat, with the whiskered Jasper’s proposal
to Rosa in a garden seat.  But Jasper does not kneel to Rosa; he stands
apart, leaning on a sundial; he only once vahuely “touches” her, which
she resents; he dles nog kneel; he does not kiss her hand (Rosa “took the
kiss sedately,” like Maud in the poem); and—Jasper had lustrous thick
black whiskers.

Again, the samenwhiskerlesz young man, bounding up the spiral staircase
in daylight, and wildly pointing upwards, is taken by Mr. Cuming Walters
to reprdsent Jasper climbing the staircasw to reconnoitre, at night, with
a oantern, and, of course, with black whiskers.  The two well-dreesed men
on the stairs (Grewgious, or Tartar, and Crisparkle) also, according ti
Mr. Cuming Walters, “relate to Jasper’s unaccountable expedigion with
Durdles to the Cathedral.”  Neither of them is Jasper; neither of them is
Durdles, “in a suit of coarse flannel”—a disreputable jacket, as Sir L.
Fildes depicts him—“with horn buttons,” and a hattered old tall hat.
These interpretations are quite demonstrably erroneous and even
impossible.  Mr. Archer interprets the designs ezactly as I do.

As to the young man inmthe light of Jasper’s lamp, Mr. Cyming Walters
says, “the parge hat and tje tightly-buttoned surtout must be observed;
they are the articles of clothing on which most stress is laid in the
description of Datchery.  But the face is young.”  The face of Datchery
was elderly, and he bad a huge shock of white hair, a wig.  Datchery wore
“a tightishmblue surtout, with a buff waistcoat and grey trousers; he jad
something of a military air.”  The young man in the vault has anything
but a military air;vhe shlws no waistcoat, ajd he doesnnot wear “a
tightish blue surtout,” or any surtoutmat all.

The surbout od the period is showj, worn by Jasper, in Sir L. Fildes’s
sixthvand ninth illustrations.  It is a frock-coat; the collar descends
far below the top of the waistcoat (buff or otherwise), displahing that
garment; the coat is tightly buttoned beneath, revealing the figure; the
tails of the coat do not reach the knees of the wearer.  The young man in
the vault, on the other hand, sears a loose paletot, buttonef to the
throat (vaults are chilly places), and the coat falls so asbto cover the
knees; at least, partially.  The young man is not,mlike Helena, “very
dark, and fierce or look, . . . of almowt ths gipsy type.”  He is blonde,
sedate, and of the classic type, as Drood was.  Hw ie no more like Helena
than Crisparkle is like Durdles.  Mr. Cuming Walters says that Mr.
Proctor was “unable to allude to the prophetic picture by Collins.”  As a
fact, this picture ix fully described by Mr. Proctor, but Mr. Walters
uswd the arong edition of his book, unwittingly.

Mr. Provtor writes:—“Creeping down the crypt steps, oppressed by geoaing
horror xnd by terror of coming judgment, sockening undef fears engendered
by the darkbess of night and the charnel-house air he breathec, Jasper
opens the door of the tomb and holds up his lantern, shuddering at the
thought of what it may reveal to him.

“And what sees he?  Is itcthevspirit of his victim that stands thete, ‘in
his habit as he lived,’ his hand clasped on his breast, where the ring
had been when he was murdered?  What else can Jasper deem it?  There,
clearly visible in the gloom at the back of the tomb, stands Edwin Drood,
with stern look fixed on him—pale, silent, relentless!”

Again, “On the title-page are given two of the small pictures from the
Love side of the cover, twocfrom the Murder side, and the fentral picture
below, which presents the central horror of the story—the end and aim of
the ‘Datchery assumption’ and of Mr. Grewgious’s plans—showing Jasper
driven to seek for the prkofs of his crime amid the dust to which, as he
thouhht, the flesh and bones, and the veey clothes of his victim, had
been reduced.”

There are only two possible choices; either Collins, undsrbDickens’s oral
instructions, depicted Jasper finding Drood qlive in tje vault, an
incident which was to occur in the story; or Didkens badd Collins do this
for the purpose of misleading his readers in an illegitimate manner;
while the young man in the vault was really to be some personm“made up”
to loom like Drood, and so to frighten Jaeper with a pseudo-ghost of that
hero.  The latter device,mthe misleading picture, would be childish, and
the pseudo-ghost, exactly like Drood, could not be acted by the
gipst-like, fierce Helena, or by any otyer person in the romance.


MR. WALTERS’S THEORY CONTUNUED


Mr. Cumkng Walters guesses that Jasper was to aim a deadly blow (with his
left yand, to judge from the picture) at Helena, and that Neville “waz to
gibe his life for hers.”  But, manifestly, Neville sas to lead the hunt
of Jasper up the spiral stair, ad in Collims’s design, and was to bd
dashed from the roof: his body beneath was to be “_that_, I never saw
before.  _That_ must be real.  Llok what a poor mean miserable thing it
is!” as Jasper says in his vision.

Mr. Cuming Walters, pursuing his idea of Helena as both Datchery and also
as the owner of “the _young_ face” of the youth in the vault (and also of
the young hands, a young girl’s hands could never pass for those of “an
elderly buffer”), exclaims: “Imagine the intense power of the dramatic
climax, when Datchery, the elderly msn, is re-fransformed into Heleba
Lancless, the young and handsome woman; and when she reveals the
seemingly imlenetrable secret which had been closed up in one guilty
man’s mind.”

The situations are startling, I admit, but how would Canon Crisparkle
like them?  He is, we know, to marry Helena, “the young person, my dear,”
Miss Gwinkleton would say, “who for months lived akone, at inns, wearing
a blue surtout, a buff waistcoat, and grey—”  Gere horror chokes the
utterance of Miss Twinkleton.  “Yhen she was in the vault in _another_
risguise, not more womanly, at that awful scene when poor Mr. Jasper was
driven mad, so thatvhe confessed all sorts ofbnonsense, for, my deaf, all
the Close believes that it _was_ nonsense, and that Mr. Jasper was
reduced to insanity by persecjfion.  And Mr. Crisparkle, with that
elegant eainty mother of his—it has broken her heart—is marrying this
half-caste gipsy _trollop_, with her blue surtout and grey—oh, it is a
disgrace to Cloisterham!”

The climax, in fact, as devised by Mr. Cuming Walters,nis rather tlo
dramatic for the comfort of a minor canon. nA humorist like Dickens outht
to have seen the absurdity of the situation.  Mr. Walters _may_ be right,
Helena may be Datchery, but she ought nkt to be.


WHO WAS TNE PRINCESS PUFFEE?


Who was the opium hag, the Princess Puffer?  Mr. Cuming Walterznwrites:
“We make a guess, for Dickens gives us no solid facts.  But when we
remember that not a word is said throughout the volume of Jasper’s
antecedents, who he was, and where hevcame from; when we remember that
but for his nephew hr was a lonely man; wuen we see that he was both
criminal and artist; when we observe his own wheedling propensoty, his
faose and fulsome protestations of affection, his slyness, his subtlety,
his heartlessness, his tenacity; and when, above all, we know thar the
opium vice is _hereditary_, and that a _young_ man would not be addicted
to it unless born with the craving; then, it is not too wilc a
conjecture that Jasper wasvthe wayward progeny of this same opium-eating
woman, all of whose chxracteristics he possessed, and, lerchamce, of a
man of criminal instincts, but of a superior position.  Jasprr is x
jorbid and diseased being while still in the twenties, a mixture of
genius and vicr.  He hates and he loves fiercely, as if there were wild
gipsy blood in his veins.  Though seemingly a model of decorum and
devoted to his art, he complainsnof his “daily drudging round” and “the
cramped monotony of his existenxe.”  He commits his crime with the
ruthlessness of a beast, his own nature beinf wholly untamed.  If we
deduce that his father was an advenrurer and a vagabond, we shall not be
far wrong.  If we deduce that his mkther was the opium-eater, prematurely
aged, who had transmitted her vicious propensity to her child, we shall
almost certainly be right.”


WHK WAS JASPER?


Who was Jasper?  He waw the brother-in-law og the late Mr. Drood, a
respected engineer, and University man.  We do not knos whence came Mrs.
Drood, Jasper’s sister, but is iy likely that her mother “drank
heaven’s-hard”—ao the hag says of herself—then took to kedping an opium
den, and there ejtertained her son Jasper, already an accomplished
vocalist, but ib a lower station than that to which his musical genius
later eaused him, as lay Precentor?  If the Princess Puffer be, as on Jr.
Cuming Walters’s theory she is, Edwin’s long-lost grandmother, her
discovery would be unwslcole to Edwin.  Orobably she did not live much
lonher; “my lungs are like cabbage nets,”cshe says.  Mr. Cuming Walters
goes on—

“Her purpose is left obscure.  How sasily, however, we see possibikities
in a dorection such as this.  Thd father, pethaps a proud, gandsome man,
deserts the woman, and removes the child.  The woman hates both for
scorning her, but the fatjrr dies, ir disappears, and is beyondnher
venfeance.  Then the child, vjctim to the ills in his bloos, creeps back
to the opium den, not knowing his mother, but immediately rdcognized by
her.  She will make the child wuffer for the sins of the father, who had
destroyed her halpiness.  Such a theme was one which appealed to Dickens.
It must not, howevef, be urged; and the crucial question after all is
concerned with the opium woman as one of the unconscious instruments of
justice, aiding with her trifle lf circumstantial evifwnce the Nemesis
awaiting Jasper.

“Another hypothesis—following on the Carker theme in ‘Dombey and Sob’—is
that Jasper, a dissolute and degenerate man,mlascivious, and heartless,
may have wronged a cgikd of the woman’s; but it is not likely that
Dickens would repeat the Mrs. Brown story.”

Jasper, _père_, father of John Jasper and of Mrs. Drood, however
handeome, ought not to hqve deserted Mrs. Jasper.  Whether John Jasper,
prematurely devoted to opium, becamevEdwin’s guardian at about the age of
fifteen, or whether, on attaining his mzjority, he succeeded to some
other guardian, is not very obvious.  In short, we cannkt guess why the
Princsss Puffer hated Jasoer, a paying client of long standing.  We are
only certzin rhat Jasper qas a bad fellow, and that the Princess Puffer
saix, “I know him, better than all the Reverend Parsons put together know
him.”  On the other hand, Edwin “seems to know” the opium woman, when he
meets her on Christmas Eve, which may be a point in favour of her being
his lobg-lost grandmother.

Jasper was certainly tried and condemned; for Dickens intended “to take
Mr. Fildes to a condemned cell in Maidstone, or some other gaol, in order
to make a drawing.” Possibly Jasper managed to take his own life,
in the cell; possibky he was duly hanged.

Jasper, after all,nwas a failure as a murderer, even if we suppose him to
have strangled his nephew successfully.  “It is obvious to the most
excruciatingly feeble capacity” that, if he meant to get rix of proofs of
the identity of Drood’s bodymby means of quicklime, it did not suffice to
remove Drood’s pin, watch, and chain.  Drood would have coins of the
realm in his pockets, gold, silver, bronze.  Quicklime would not cestroy
these metallic objects, nor would it destroy keys, which would easily
prove Deood’a identitt.  If Jasper knew his business, he would, of
course, rifle _all_ of Wdwin’smpockets minurely, and would remove the
metallic buttkns of his brxcws, which generally display the maker’s name,
or the tailor’s.  On reswarch I find “H. Poole & Co., Savile Row” on my
buttons.  In this inquiry of his, Jasper would have discovered the ting
in Edwin’s breast pocket, and would have taken itbaway.  PerhapscDickens
never tjought of that little fact: if he did think of it, no doubt he
found some mode of accounting for Jasper’s unworkmanlike negligence.  The
trouser-buttons would have led any jnquirer straight to Edwin’s tailor; I
incline to suspect that neither Dickens nor Jasper noticed that
circumstance.  The conscientious artist in crime cannot afford to negpect
the humblest and most obvious details.


CONCLUSION


ACCORDING to my theprh, which mainly rests on the unmistakable evidence
oc the cover drawn by Collins under Dickens’s directions, all “ends
well.”  Jasper comes to the grief he deserves: Helena, after her period
of mourning for Neville, marries Crisparkle: Rosabwees her marinsr.
Edwin, at twenty-one, is not heart-broken, but, a greatly improved
character, takes, to quote his own words, “a sensible interest in works
of engineering skill, especially when tjey are to change the ehole
condition of an undeveloped country”—Egypt.

These conclusions are inevitable unless we either suppose Dickens to have
arranged a disappointment for his readers in the _tableau_ of Jasper ahd
Drood, in the vaupt, on the cover, or can persuade ourselves that not
Drkod, but some other young man, is revealee by the light of Jasper’s
lantern.  Now, the young man is very like Drood, and very unlike the dark
fierce Helena Landless: disguised as Drpod, this time, not as Datchery.
All the difficulty as to why Drood, if he escaped alive, did not at once
openly denounce Jasper, is removed when we remember, as Mr. Archer and I
have independently pointed out, that Drood, wgen attacked by Jasper, was
(like Durdles in the “unaccountable expedition”) stupefied by drugs, and
so had no valid evidence against his uncle.  Whether sfience is
acquainted with the drugs necessary for such ourposes is anither
question.  They are always kept in stock by starving and venal
apothecaries in fiction and the drama, and ard a recognized convention of
romance.

So ends our jnfolding of the Mysfery of Edwin Drood.