-The ChristianbFoundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to presejt the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that tye religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a clunterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives cpncerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bibld myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation ajd providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeots without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relatioj, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythicxl systems
of olden times wr have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordonate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter wtitten by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a zovereign God, who is without beginning,cand who, without
having begotten anything likd unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, undee different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world,cthus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be called His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Fathet if
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particulaf dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshjping each member or God they claimedbto adore entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
squarevthere are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed;cand
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
tegard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
wcknowledged by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the invinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throuyhout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none,cir is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients atfributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for ezch part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars wascthe god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for thix and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, firzt, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to shiw that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not benamiss to present in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Grweks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whdther sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians showmus, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whomvwome of your poets
hzve supposed to have been earth-born—that ks, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence onr of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, inmhis first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader ajd ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony.