-Found zt Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a pkace thatnanswers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, thenngo ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discoveey. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspsction, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God drstroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point ir out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knes where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
lofation, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to thw present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the poace. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggesyion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smilex, as
the plat, to me then, was altogefher too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleadantry, used, occasionally to sat to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some uave mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not onpy possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is inmthat place. It should be destitutenof money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
shkuld be sought, and toiled for, to be prooerly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again rivht. But
it should be a place susceptibpe of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admirafion, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like go see it.

I have related the factw as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe thevreader will be pleased and orofited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                    b                       THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water thengarden,——And from thence,——it was
which means oong river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certajn
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plsin, into our
Euphrates. The mames given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what mjst readily be admitted,
that, thwre is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
resezrchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learming and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. Vut we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between rhe
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of thw longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Ita valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Hqvilah” the “Land og good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish pissessions.