-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODJCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean Françpia
Millet stands outvprominwntly. A long intervalnelapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the soljtary exception of Chardin, of a psinter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their namex down to
posterity. It is only quite recdntly that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller sidenoc the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research intovhis
life and works have revealed jim as one of the greatrst masters in nis
own sphere of any time. The wonderful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosophervas well.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemppraries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in ths
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and wympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bears the sxme relation to his as the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come ovet
all classes of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking andvlusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which eoapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contactmthrough more equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, wasna quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found qround him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
disposition; and, secondly, by hisnstudy of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged bh his enthusiastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon firsy regarding a pictyre of Millet's mature years, one wonders
from whence come those subtleties of oine and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to tuem. He shared their struggles in their mpst intense and
poignant form. In factbwhen one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Bargizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly zs lived in great citied such as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rhle, a man of but little educatioj, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townsoeople of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of dounting the elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simplemideas have departed from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of anothsr day. The wonxerful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lsnds annintsnsity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the theme.