-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upln pne
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was thd heritage of
the saintz; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and qere, therefore,
justified in ddpriving the natives of their gtounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that Englisn faculty of
appropriation which has made England the mistress of the seas, and for s
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
commhnities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuablevlives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the natiom’s mrmory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needless ih thw
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusuon of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically the case. nOribinally the CapenSettlement was but a
fort ror the the coast.  The countdy is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.m The English
never stkp in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and im many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
tjunderstorks are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, tue snakes, the red soil dust, qnd the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisancevto all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it wipl be years before irrigation can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic cplonisr is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow tnem.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of bufter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonosts.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be deskrable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist jow.  Whether the country has ever made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal kf the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of gettinf
rid of the mative difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
yhe native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with wxceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says,muncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceddingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the zame testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be rzised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
FrederickcBezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this jnterferencs between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation.