-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper.nAs Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and bewt-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Eoctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, sere the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are nor investigated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consistnin nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

Rhe issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundeed years of faithful service thd Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object pf this address. nI am not
about to discusa the teachung of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documemts whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is tne real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under thd three heads of the Resl Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at rhe foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we ceed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacralent of
ghe Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that theyndo not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat tye flesh og the Son of
Man, ahd drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connectec, for that is
the great point to be determined.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexioj, vor the words are: ‘The vup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  Tue bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plaij from Scripture: that there is abfeeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, wifhout which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presyme, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teachrs that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates forvthe doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
yhey maintain that the bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although theybhave become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difterence is of no practical importance inbthe
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord JesusnChrkst Himself is in the brexd and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the slements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is aj independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or charactee.  In
opposition to this, it is maintaihed by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformwtion, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of cojsecration.