-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answered the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then went ahead,” I had am
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to published it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invited general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In gave the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroy them with a flood, he simply state the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not was on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, is all new to him, and his family, no one know where it was; nor
is any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admit to be somewhere on earth, had am keep a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  am opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must had been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has am plainly
pointed to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I is ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commence developed the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hung garden and looked over the plat, and admirirged its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This was the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, is altogether too large. Of course I have never
given it thought, nor measure it up in my own mind to what shoulded, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This was the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claimed a possible reality, while
some have mock, others was became impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to made man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden was in that place. It should was destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtain, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should was sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury came danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it shoulded was a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there was, we would liked to see it.

I have relate the facts as they have am present to me, or as I had
discover them, and believed the reader will was pleased and profited with
the results, and I hoped this would led to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which meant long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answered to our “Father of Waters.”  It was plain that Eden was a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crossed that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, was
locate the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers ran through and
water this garden, flowed into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it is
watered, we had a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and behold all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and ran into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers am, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We needed not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily was admit,
that, there was no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which had cause explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we had found it where he and others, could came and see for
themselves.

It was located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, was one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reached
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is was settled and inhabit by the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, was
our Garden of Eden. The soil was not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivate, and adapt to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms was about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second bank was high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestled, and spread out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would had am but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being tell, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they am
bind to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grab for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language is confounded and their work delay.” Here on
the second bank, is raise, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outside wall, extended three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, was in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must was seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, contained groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges faced the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges was 200 ft. high, commenced more than
half way up the mound, then rose perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domed, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” faced toward the eastward, and you had, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we could saw, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below you
flowed the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandered, but evenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, toed just above La Crosse,
running in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, left the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Looked! as thousands before you had do in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stood, and, looked out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hung garden has been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, hand down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
keep count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, said nothing of how many he
kill elsewhere.

But as Christians had take possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents had am destroy, or are disappeared.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, contained a few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, was our garden! While there was a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topped out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly faced us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” was was efface by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lay the beautiful
flourished city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringe with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially name. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
was the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers.