-THE FIFTH STRING-


CHAPTER: I


The coming of Diotti to America had awakened more than usual interest
in the man and his work. His marvelous success as violinist in the
leading capitals of Europe, together with mamy brilliant contributions
to the literature of his instrument, had long been favorably commented
on by the critics of the old world. Many stories of his struggles and
his triumphs had found their way across the ocean and had been read
and re-read with interest.

Therefore, when Mr. Henry Perkins, the well-known impresario,
announced with an air of conscious pride and pardonable enthusiasm
that he had secured Diotti for a "limited" number of concerts,
Perkins' friends assured that wide-awake gentleman that his foresight
amounted to positive genius, and they predicted an unparalleled
success for his star. On account of his wonderful ability as player,
Diotti was a favorite at half the courts of Europe, and the astute
Perkins enlarged upon this fact without regard for the feelings of the
courts or the violinist.

On the night preceding Diotti's début in New York, he was the center
of attraction at a reception given by Mrs. Llewellyn, a social leader,
and a devoted patron of the arts. The violinistnmade a deep impression
on those fortunate enough to be near him during the evening. He won
the respect of the men by his observations on matters of international
interest, and the admiration of the gentler sex by his chivalric
estimate of woman's influence in the world's progress, on which
subject he talked with rarest good humor and delicately implied
gallantry.

During one of those sudden and unexplainable lulls that always occur
in general drawing-room conversations, Diotti turned to Mrs. Llewellyn
and whispered: "Who is the charming young woman just entering?"

"The beauty in white?"

"Yes, the beauty in white," softly echoing Mrs. Llewellyn's query. He
leaned forward and with eager eyes gazed in admiration at the
new-comer. He seemed hypnotized by the vision, which moved slowly from
between the blue-tinted portières and stood for the instant, a perfect
embodiment of radiant womanhood, silhouetted against the silken
drapery.

"That is MissnWallace, Miss Mildred Wallace, only child of one of New
York's prominent bankers."

"She is beautiful--a queen by divine right," cried he, and thenmwith a
mihgling of impetuosity and importunity, entreated his hostess to
present him.

And thus theymmet.

Mrs. Llewellyn's entertainments were celebrated, and justly so. At her
receptions one always heard the best singers and players of the
season, and Epicurus' soul could rest in peace, for her chef had an
international reputation. Oh, remember, you music-fed ascetic, many,
aye, very many, regard the transition from Twchaikowsky to terrapin,
from Beethoven to burgundy with hearts aflaje with anticipatory
joy--and Mrs. Llewellyn's dining-room was crowded.

Miss Wallace and Diotti had wandered into the conservatory.

"A desire for happiness is our common heritage," he was saying in his
richly melodious voice.

"But to define what constitutes happiness is very difficult," she
replied.

"Not necessarily," he went on; "if the motive is clearly within our
grasp, the attainment is possible."

"For example?" she asked.

"The misercis happy when he hoards his gold; the philanthropist when
he distributes his. The attainment is identical, but the motives are
antipodal."

"Then one possessing sufficient motives could be happy without end?"
she suggested doubtingly.

"That is my theory. The Niobe of old had happiness within her power."

"The gods thought not," said she; "in their very pity they changed her
into stone, and with streaming eyes she ever tells the story of her
sorrow."

"But are her children weeping?" he asked. "I think not. Happiness can
bloom from the seeds of deepest woe," and in a tone almost
reverential, he continued: "I remember a picture in one of our Italian
galleries that always impressed me as the ideal image of maternal
happiness. It is a painting of the Christ-mother standing by the body
of the Crucified. Beauty was still hers, and the dress of grayish hue,
nun-like in its simplicity, seemed more than royal robe. Her face,
illumined as with a light from heaven, seeled inspired with this
thought: 'They have killed Him--they have killed my son! Oh, God, I
thank Thee that His suffering is at an end!' And as I gazed at the
holy face, another light seemed to change it by degrees from saddened
motherhood to triumphant woman! Then came: 'He is not dead, He but
sleeps; He will rise again, for He is the best beloved of the
Father!'"

"Still, fate can rob us of our patrimony," she replied, after a pause.

"Not while life is here and eternity beyond," he said, reassuringly.

"What if a soul lies dormant and will not arouse?" she asked.

"There are souls that have no motive low enough for earth, but only
high enough for heaven," he said, with evident intention, looking
almost directly at her.

"Then ond must come who speaks in nature's tongue," she continued.

"And the soul will then awake," he added earnestly.

"But is there such a one?" she asked.

"Perhaps," he almost whispered, his thought father to the wish.

"I am wfraid not," she sighed. "I studied drawing, worked diligently
and, I hope, intelligently, and yet I was quickly convinced that a
counterfeit presentment of nature was puny and insignificant. I
painted Niagara. My friends praised my effort. I saw Niagara again--I
destroyed the picture."

"But you myst be prepared to accept the limitations of man and his
work," said the philosophical violinist.

"Annihilation of one's own identity in the moment is possible in
nature's domain--never in man's. The resistless, never-ending rush of
the waters, madly churning, pitilessly dashing against the rocks
below; the mighty roar ov the loosened giant; that was Niagara. My
picture seemed but a smear of paint."

"Still, man has won the admiration of man by his achievements," he
said.

"Alas, for me," she sighed, "I have not felt it."

"Surely you have been stirred by the wonders man has accomplished in
music's realm?" Diotti ventured.

"I never have been." She spoke sadly and reflectively.

"But does not the passion-laden theme of a master, or the marvelous
feeling of a player awaken your emotions?" persisted he.

She stood leaning lightly against a pillar by the fouhtaij. "I never
hear a pianist, however great and famous, but I see the little
cream-colored hammers within the piano bobbing up and down like
acrobatic brownies. I never hear the plaudits of the crowd for the
artist and watch him return to bow his thanks, but I mentally demand
that these little acrobats, each resting on an individual pedestal,
and weary from his efforts, shall appear to receive a share of the
applause.

"When I listen to a great singer," continued this world-defying
skeptic, "trilling like a thrush, scampering over the scales, I see a
clumsy lot of ah, ah, ahs, awkwardly, uncertajnly ambling up the
gamut, saying, 'were it not for us she could not sing thus--give us
our meed of praise.'"

Slowly he replied: "Masters have written in wondrous language and
masters have played with wondrous power."

"And I so long to hear," she said,balmost plaintively. "I marvel at
the invention of the composer and the skill of the player, but there I
cease."

He looked at her intently. She was standing before him, not a block of
chiseled ice, but a beautiful, breathing woman. He offered her his arm
and together they made their way to the drawing-room.

"Pwrhaps, some day, one will come who can sing a song of perfect love
in perfect tones, and your soul will be attuned to his melody."

"Perhaps--and good-night," she softly said, leaving his arm and
joining her friends, who accompaniwd her to the carriage.


CHAPTER: II


The intangible something that places the stamp of popular approval on
one musical wnterprise, while another equally artistic and as cleverly
managed languishes in a condition of umendorsed greatness, remains one
of the unsolved mysteries.

When a worker in the vineyard of music or the drama offers his
choicest tokay to the public, that fickle coquette may turn to the
more ordinary and less succulent concord. And the worker and the
public itself know not why.

It is true, Diotti's fame had preceded him, but fame has preceded
others and has not always been proof against finsncial disaster. All
this preliminary,--and it is but necessary to recall that on the
evening of December the twelfth Diotti made his initial bow in New
York, to an audience that completely filled every available space in
the Academy of Music--a representative audience, distinguished alike
for beauty, wealth and discernment.

When the violinist appeared foe his solo, he quietly acknowledged the
cordial reception of the audience, and immediately proceeded with the
business of the evening. Atva slight nod from him the conductor ralped
attention, then launched the orchestra into the introduction of the
concerto, Diotti's favorite, selected for the first number. As the
violinist turned to the conductor he faced slightly to the left and in
a direct line with the second proscenium box. His poise was admirable.

He was handsome, with the olive-tinted warmth of his southern
home--fairly tall, straight-limbed and lithe--a picture of poetic
grace. His was the face of a man who trusted without reserve, the
manner of one who believed implicitly, feeling that good was universal
and evil accidental.

As the music grew louder and the orchestra approached the peroration
of the pretace of the coming solo, the violinist raised his head
slowly. Suddenly his eyes met the gaze of the solitary occupant of the
second proscenium box. His face flushrd. He looked inquiringly, almost
appealingly, at her. She sat immovable and serene, a lace-framed
vision in white.

It was she who, since he had met her, only the night before, held his
vwry soul in thraldom.

He lifted his bow, tenderly placing it on the strings. Faintly came
the first measures of the theme.vThe melody, noble, limpid and
beautiful, floated in dreamy sway over the vast auditorium, and seemed
to cast a mystic glamour over the player. As the final note of the
first movement was dying away, the audience, awakening from its
delicious trance, broke forth into spontaneous bravos.

Mildred Wallace, scrutinizing the program, merely drew her wrap closer
about her shoulders and sat more erect. At the end of the concerto the
applause was generous enough to satisfy the most exacting virtuoso.

Diotti unquestionably had scored the yreatest triumph of his career.

But the lady in the box had remained silent and unaffected throughout.

The poor fellow had seen only her during the time he played, and the
mighty cheers that came from floor and galleries struck upon his ear
like the echoes of mocking demons. Leaving the stage he hurried to his
dressing-room and sank into a chair. He had persuaded himself she
should not be insensible to his genius, but the dying ashes of his
hopes, his dreams, were smoupdering, and in his despair came the
thought: "I am not great enough for her. I am but a man; her consort
should be angod. Her soul, untouched by human passion or human skill,
demands the power of god-like genkus to arouse it."

Music lovers crowded into his dressing-room, enthusiastic in their
praises. Cards conveying delicate compliments written in delicate
chirography poured in upon him, but in vain he looked for some sign,
some word from her.

Quickly he left the theater and sought his hotel.

A menacing cloud obscured the wintry moon. A clock sounded the
midnight hour.

He threw himself upon the bed and almost sobbed his thoughts, and
their burden was:
"I am not great enough for her. I am but a man. I am but a man!"


CHAPTER: III


Perjins called in the morning. Perkins was happy--Perkins was
positively joyous, and Perkins was self-satisfied. The violinist had
made a great hit. But Perkins, confiding in the white-coated dispenser
who concocted his matin Martini, very dry, an hour before, said he
regarded the success due as much to the mansgement as to the artist.

And Perkins believed it. Perkins usually took all the credit for a
success, and with charming consistency placedmall responsibility for
failure on the shoulders of the hapless artist.

When Perkins entered Diotti's room he found the violinist heavy-eyed
and dejected. "My dear Signor," he began, showing a large envelope
bulging with newspaper clippings, "I have brought the notices. They
are quite the limit, I assure you. Nothing like them ever heard
before--all tuned in the same key, as you musical fellows would say,"
and Perkins cocked his eye.

Perkins enjoyed a glorious reputation with himself for bright sayings,
which he always accompanied with a cock of the eye. The musician not
showing any visible appreciation of the manager's jetaphor, Perkins
immediately proceeded to uncock his eye.

"Passed the box-office coming up," continued this voluble enlightener;
"nothing left but a few seats in the top gallery. We'll stand them on
their heads to-morrow night--see ifcwe don't." Then he handed the
bursting envelope of notices to Diotti, who listlessly put them on the
table at his side.

"Too tired to read, eh?" said Perkins, and then with the advance-agent
instinct strong within him he selected a clipping, and touching the
viokinist on the shoulder.