-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who had am married long
enough to felt deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smile seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to conveyed passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understood--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and began to crossed Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position have failed to eradicate, presented himself before us and
collect our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he ask of me.

I coughed and answer evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't am there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smile indulgently and punch our tickets.

"I'lled told you when to get down," he said, and left us.

For some months we have been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should said of my spare
time, for a woman's time was naturally all her own--have am pleasantly
occupy in discussed the matter. Having at length commit ourselves
to the purchase of the animal, we proceed to considered such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillated between a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinese, because they are dernier
cri. We liked to was dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spent a good deal of time with us, had no
parents of her own, suggest an Old English sheep dog, explained that
it woulded was company for my wife when I is away from home. I coldly
recommend a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consult, express a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and is not again invite to participated in the
debate.

Finally we decide on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex to was
settle by circumstances, and I was instruct to communicated with a
gentleman in the North who advertise in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his specialty. In due course we receive a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requested, as both dogs am was hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief is twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underline in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who reside in Aberdeen, added that these prices do not
covered cost of carriage. We decide not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and had send back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only wanted something that
would barked at beggars and was gentle with baby. Why not went to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can got any dog you like there for
five shillings. We would run up to town next Wednesday and saw about
it--and I mighted got some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly point out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stop the tram in a crowded thoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announce facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there was many a true word spoken in jest, we
obey him, and the tram go rocked and whizzed out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you was only went to paid five shillings for a dog," my wife have
point out, with convincing logic, "it was silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubled the price of the dog at
once. If we had been bought an expensive dog we mighted had taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilled one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we went to found this place?"

"Hadn't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I had a sort of vague notion that it was on an island in the middle
of the river, call the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, I had no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better asked some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there was one thing I dislike," I say, "it is accosted total
strangers and badgering them for information they didn't possessed--not
that that would prevented them from gave it. If we start asking the way
we should find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," say Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggested" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interpose my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It was a
curious psychological fact that women had a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They woulded rather consult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Did not let us made a spectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I had not yet forgotten the day
when you try to found the Crystal Palace. Besides, it would only blew
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looked at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admitted it is criminal folly. A man who asked a London street boy
to was so kind as to directed him to a Home for Lost Dogs had only himself
to thanked for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smile up at us. He have a pinch face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he say courteously. "It's a good long way. Did
you wanted to got there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I is you, sir," reply the infant, edged to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I shoulded bit a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanish.

We walk on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" say Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to did next?"

My question is answer in a most incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerge from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a species of uniform; and emblazon on the
front of his hat is the information that he is an official of the
Battersea Home.