-Observations on the State of Religion and Literature in Spain-


THERE are in Spain, according to Antillon’s  calculations, two
hundred thousand ecclesiastics.  They possess immense revenues and an
incalculable influence over the mass of the people; though it is certain
that influence is diminishing, notwithstanding the countenance and
co-operation of a government deeply interested in preserving their
authority.

It would be great injustice to the regular clergy of Spain to class them
with the immense hordes of monks and friars, scattered over the face of
the Peninsula, some possessing rich and well-stored convents, large
estates and accumulating wealth, and others (the mendicant orders) who
prey more directly on the labours of the poor, and compel the industrious
to administer to their holy, uninterrupted laziness.  The former, though,
doubtless, by far too numerous, are for the most part intelligent and
humane: dispensing benevolence and consolation in their respective
parishes; friendly, in many instances, to liberty and devoted to
literature.  The latter, with few, but striking exceptions,  are
unmanageable masses of ignorance and indolence.   They live (as one
of the Spanish poets says) in a state of sensual enjoyment between the
organ-loft and the refectory, to which all other enjoyment is but
purgatory;  the link which should connect them with the common weal
for ever broken; the ties of family and friend dissolved; their authority
founded on the barbarism and degradation of the people, they are
interested in stemming the torrent of improvement in knowledge and
liberty, which must in the end inevitably sweep away these “cumberers of
the soil.”  No society in which the sound principles of policy are at all
understood, would consent to maintain a numerous body of idle,
unproductive, useless members in opulence and luxury, (at the expense of
the active and the laborious,) merely because they had chosen to decorate
themselves with peculiar insignia—to let their beards grow, or to shave
their heads; and though the progress of civilization in Spain has been
greatly retarded, or rather it has been compelled to retrograde under the
present system of despotism, yet, that great advances have been made
since the beginning of the late Revolution, is happily too obvious to be
denied. 
That Revolution, in fact, has produced, and will continue to produce, a
very favourable influence on the ecclesiastical government of Spain.

Leaving out of consideration the immense number of priests and friars who
perished during the atrocious invasion of their country, the destruction
of convents, the alienation of church property, and the not unfrequent
abandonment of the religious vow, unnoticed amidst the confusion and
calamities of active war, more silent, but more extensive changes have
been going on.  The Cortes, when they decreed that no Noviciates should
be allowed to enrol themselves,  gave a death-blow to the monastic
influence, and since the re-establishment of the ancient despotism, the
chasm left by this want of supply has not been filled up, nor is likely
to be; for, the greater part of the convents (except those very richly
endowed) complain that few candidates propose themselves, except from the
lower classes of society, who are not likely to maintain the credit or
add to the influence of the order.  Examples are now extremely rare of
men of family and fortune presenting themselves to be received within the
cloisters, and offering all their wealth and power as the price of their
admission.  Another circumstance, the consequence of the Revolution, has
tended greatly to lessen the influence of the regular clergy, where it is
most desirable it should be lessened, among the lower classes.  Driven
from their cells by the bayonets of enemies, or obliged to desert them
that their convents might become hospitals for their sick and wounded
friends, they were compelled to mingle with the mass of the people.  To
know them better was to esteem them less, and the mist of veneration with
which popular prejudice had so long surrounded them, was dispersed, when
they became divested of every outward distinction, and exhibited the same
follies and frailties as their fellow-men.   He who, in the imposing
procession, or at the illumined altar, appeared a saint or a prophet, was
little, was nothing, when mingling in the common relations of life he
stood unveiled before his undazzled observers.  For the first time it was
discovered that the monks were not absolutely necessary for the
preservation even of religion.  Masses were celebrated as before: the
host paraded the streets with its accustomed pomp and solemnity: the
interesting ceremonials which accompany the entrance and the exit of a
human being in this valley of vicissitude, were all conducted with their
wonted regularity.  Still less were they wanted to implore the blessing
of Heaven on the labours of the husbandman, whose fruits grew and were
gathered in with unvarying abundance.  Without them the country was
freed from the ignoble and degrading yoke of the usurper, while success
and martial glory crowned the arms of their military companions, (the
British,) who cared little for “all the trumpery” of “friars white,
black, or grey;” and if the contagion of their contempt did not reach
their Catholic friends, they lessened, at least, the respect with which
the inmates of the convent had been so long regarded.

But in anticipating a period in which the Spaniard shall be released from
monkish influence, it must not be forgotten how interwoven is that
influence with his most delightful recollections and associations.  His
festivities, his romerias,  his rural pastimes, are all connected
with, and dependent on the annual return of some saint’s-day, in honour
of which he gives himself up to the most unrestrained enjoyment.  A mass
is with him the introductory scene to every species of gaiety, and a
procession of monks and friars forms a part of every picture on which his
memory most delights to dwell.—And a similar, though, perhaps, a stronger
impression is created on his mind by the enthusiastic “love of song,”

 so universal in Spain.  He lives and breathes in a land of poetry
and fiction: he listens with ever-glowing rapture to the Romanceros, 
who celebrate the feats of his heroes, and surround his monks and hermits
with all the glories of saints and angels: he hears of their mighty
works, their sufferings, their martyrdom; and the tale, decorated with
the charms of verse, is dearer to him than the best of holy writ.  The
peculiar favourites of the spotless Virgin, their words fall on his ear
like the voice of an oracle, their deeds have the solemn sanction of
marvellous miracles.  To them he owes that his country is the special
charge of the queen of angels, the mother of God; and in every convent he
sees the records of the wondrous interpositions of heaven, which has so
often availed itself of the agency of the sainted inmates, while every
altar is adorned with the grateful offerings of devout worshipers,
miraculously restored to health or preserved from danger.  He feels
himself the most privileged among the faithful.  On him “our Lady of
Protection” (del Amparo) smiles; to him the Virgin of Carmen  bows
her gracious head.  In his eye ten thousand rays of glory encircle the
brow of his patron-saint, the fancied tones of whose voice support,
assure and encourage him: he believes that his scapulary  (blessed by
a Carmelite friar) secures him from every evil: his house is adorned with
the pope’s bull of indulgences—a vessel of holy water is suspended over
his bed, and what more can he want, what danger can approach him?  His
mind is one mass of undistinguishing, confiding, comforting faith.

That faith is his religion, his Christianity!  How difficult will it be
to separate the evil from the good, if, indeed, they can be separated!

What a fortress must be overthrown before truth and reason can advance a
single step!  What delightful visions must be forgotten, what animating
recollections, what transporting hopes!  Have we a right to rouse him
from these blessed delusions?  This is indeed the ignorance that is
bliss.  Is it not folly to wish him wise?

But, alas! this is only one side of the picture! for, however soothing,
however charming the contemplation of contented ignorance may be to the
imagination, in the eye of reason the moral influence of such a system is
baneful in the extreme.  All error is evil; and the error which
substitutes the external forms of worship for its internal influence on
the heart, is a colossal evil.  Here we have a religion, if such it may
be called, that is purely ceremonial.  Its duties are not discharged in
the daily walk of life, not by the cultivation of pure and pious and
benevolent affections, but by attending masses, by reciting Paternosters
and Ave Marias, by pecuniary offerings for souls in purgatory, and by a
thousand childish observances, which affect remotely, if they affect at
all, the conduct and the character.  The Spaniard attends his parish
church to hear a service in an unknown tongue;  he bends his knees
and beats his bosom at certain sounds familiar to his ear, but not to his
sense; he confesses and communicates with undeviating regularity; 
and sometimes, perhaps, he listens to a sermon in the eloquent style and
beautiful language of his country, not, indeed, instructing him in the
moral claims of his religion, but celebrating the virtues and recounting
the miracles of some saint or martyr to whom the day is dedicated.  He
reads his religious duties, not in a Bible, but an Almanack; and his
Almanack is but a sort of Christian mythology.  His saints are more
numerous than the deities of the pantheon; and, to say the truth, there
are many of them little better than these. 
He is told, however, that his country exhibits the proudest triumphs of
orthodox Christianity.  Schism and heresy have been scattered, or at
least silenced: and if in Spain the eye is constantly attracted, and the
heart distressed, by objects of unalleviated human misery; if the
hospitals are either wholly unprotected, or abandoned to the care of the
venal and the vile; if the prisons are crowded with a promiscuous mass of
innocence and guilt, in all its shades and shapes of enormity —what
does it matter?  Spain, Catholic Spain, has preserved her faith
unadulterated and unchanged, and her priests assure us that an error in
creed is far more dangerous, (or to use their own mild language,) far
more damnable, than a multitude of errors in conduct.  A depraved heart
may be forgiven, but not an erring head.  This is, in fact, the fatal
principle, whose poison spreads through this strongly-cemented system.

To this we may attribute its absurdities, its errors, its crimes.  This
has created Dominicks and Torquemadas.

In a word, intolerance, in its widest and worst extent, is the foundation
on which the whole of the Spanish ecclesiastical edifice rests.  It has
been called the main pillar of the constitution, and is so inwrought with
the habits and prejudices of the nation, that the Cortes, with all their
general liberality, dared not allow the profession of any other religion
than the “Catolica Apostolica Romana unica Verdadera.”   The cry of
innovation there, as elsewhere, became a dreadful weapon in the hands
of those who profess to believe that errors become sanctified by age.

Too true it is, that if long usage can sanction wrong, persecution might
find its justification in every page of Spanish history, from the time
when Recaredo, the gothic monarch, abandoned his Arian principles (with
the almost solitary exception of the tolerant and ill-treated Witiza).

Long, long before the Inquisition had erected its frightful pretensions
into a system, or armed itself with its bloody sword, its spirit was
abroad and active.  Thousands and tens of thousands of Jews and Moors had
been its victims, and its founders did no more than obtain a regal or a
papal licence, for the murders which would otherwise have been probably
committed by a barbarous and frenzied mob, excited by incendiary monks
and friars.

The Inquisition has, no doubt, been greatly humanized by the progress of
time; as, in order to maintain its influence in these more enlightened
and inquiring days, it has availed itself of men of superior talent,
these have softened the asperity, or controlled the malignity and petty
tyranny of its inferior agents.  Its vigilance and its persecutions are,
indeed, continually at work, yet, I believe its flames will never again
be lighted.  Its greatest zeal is now directed against Freemasons, of
whom immense numbers occupy its prisons and dungeons.  I have conversed
with many who have been incarcerated by the Inquisition, and they agree
in stating that torture is no longer administered.   But its
influence on literature is perhaps greater than ever; for though Spain
possesses at the present moment a great number of admirable writers, the
press was never so inactive.  The despotism exercised over authors 
and publishers is so intolerable, that few have courage voluntarily to
submit to it.  Often after authorizing the publication of a work, they
order it to be suppressed, and every copy to be burnt, and never think of
reparation to those who are so cruelly injured.  Their presumption in
condemning whatever they cannot understand,  their domiciliary
visits, their arbitrary decrees, against which there is no security and
no appeal, make them fearful enemies and faithless friends.

With the difficulty, delay, expense and frequent impossibility of
obtaining a licence for the publication of any valuable work, may be well
contrasted the ridiculous trash which daily issues from the Spanish
press.  Accounts of miracles wrought by the different virgins,  lives
of holy friars and sainted nuns, romances of marvellous conversions,
libels against Jews  and heretics and Freemasons, histories of
apparitions, and so forth, are generally introduced, not by a mere
licence of the inquisitor, but by long and laboured eulogiums.

It is no novel observation, that the most cruel and intolerant
persecutors have often been men wholly devoid of religious principle;
men, who consider the religion of the state only as a part of its civil
policy, and who treat the denial of a national creed with the same
severity as the infraction of an established law, or rather as a species
of treason against the supreme authority.  No plea of modest inquiry, of
conscientious doubt, or honest difference of opinion, is allowed to
oppose for a moment their sanguinary and despotic sway.  There are no
terms of safety but those of unresisting, instant, absolute prostration.

Such men are generally the prime movers of the gagging engine of
religious intolerance; and such men are to be found too abundantly in
Spain.  Others there are who imagine they see in the pomp and parade of
the Romish ritual, a system of delusion admirably adapted to beguile, or
even to bless the ignorant.  They fancy themselves beings of a higher and
nobler order, and that, while they bask in the sunshine of intellect and
knowledge, they may be well content that the uninstructed mass should
trudge on in darkness below.  Why should they throw their pearls to
senseless swine; or shower down truth and virtue on those who fatten on
vice and error?

But perhaps a larger class, which would include too the majority of the
learned clergy of Spain, are they whose honest opinions are made up of
heresy and infidelity; but their worldly interests are so inwrought with
the existing system, that the thought of sacrificing those interests to
the higher claims of right, has never occurred to them; or, if it has
occurred, has never obtained a moment’s attention.  To them it is a
glorious and gold-giving superstition.  If they can persuade themselves
that, on the whole, it is harmless, they are satisfied.  They do
more—they say it is beneficial, and they have repeated this so often,
that they, perhaps, almost believe it is true.  Would they look round
them they might see the melancholy effects which superstition and
intolerance have produced in their hapless country.  What is Seville—the
once renowned Seville, with its hundred and twenty-five churches and
convents?  The very shrine of ignorance.  It was there that the Spanish
chart of liberty was trampled under foot, amidst ten thousand shouts of
“Live the King and the Inquisition!”  “Perish the Constitution!”  Or
Cordoba, so long the cradle of the arts, the favourite seat of retiring
wisdom?  It is become the chosen abode of vice and barbarism!  The press,
which was established there in the short era of Spanish liberty, has been
torn in pieces by a frantic mob, who, excited by the monks, paraded the
streets of this unfortunate capital, threatening death to every
individual whose name had been connected with that of liberty.  How many
a town and city, once illustrious, has sunk into nothingness!   “What
remains of their ancient glory?  The ruins of palaces, of fabrics, of
store-houses and dwellings; and undilapidated churches and monasteries
and hospitals, outliving the misery of which they have been the cause.”

One might surely expect that in a country possessing eight archbishops,
more than fifty bishops, and more than a hundred abbacies, with a
jurisdiction almost episcopal; “in which,” to use the language of a
Spanish writer, “there are more churches than houses, more altars than
hearths, more priests than peasants;” in which every dwelling has its
saint, and every individual his scapulary;—one might expect to see some
benefits, some blessings resulting from this gigantic mass of
ecclesiastical influence.  Let us, then, look upon a picture drawn by the
hand of an acknowledged master.

    “Our universities  are the faithful depositaries of the
    prejudices of the middle age; our teachers, doctors of the tenth
    century.  Beardless noviciates instruct us in the sublime mysteries
    of our faith; mendicant friars in the profound secrets of philosophy;
    while barbarous monks explain the nice distinctions of metaphysics.

    “Who goes into our streets without meeting cofradias, 
    processions or rosaries; without hearing the shrill voice of eunuchs,
     the braying of sacristans, the confused sound of sacred music,
    entertaining and instructing the devout with compositions so exalted,
    and imagery so romantic, that devotion itself is forced into a smile?

    In the corners of our squares, at the doors of our houses, the
    mysterious truths of our religion are commented on by blind beggars
    to the discordant accompaniment of an untuned guitar.  Our walls are
    papered with records of ‘authentic miracles,’ compared to which, the
    metamorphoses of Ovid are natural and credible.

    “And ignorance has been the parent, not of superstition alone, but of
    incredulity and infidelity.  The Bible, the argument and evidence of
    our Christian faith, has been shamefully abandoned, or cautiously
    buried beneath piles of decretals, formularies, puerile meditations,
    and fabulous histories.

    “Monkish influence has given to the dreams and deliriums of foolish
    women, or crafty men, the authority of revealed truth.  Our friars
    have pretended to repair with their rotten and barbarous scaffolding,
    the eternal edifice of the gospel.  They have twisted and tortured
    the moral law into a thousand monstrous forms, to suit their passions
    and their interests.  Now they describe the path to heaven as plain
    and easy,—now it is difficult,—to morrow they will call it
    impassable.  They have dared to obscure with their artful
    commentaries the beautiful simplicity of the Word of God.  They have
    darkened the plainest truths of revelation, and on the hallowed
    charter of Christian liberty, they have even erected the altar of
    civil despotism!

    “In the fictions and falsehoods they have invented to deceive their
    followers, in their pretended visions and spurious miracles, they
    have even ventured to compromise the terrible majesty of heaven.

    They shew us our Saviour lighting one nun to put cakes into an oven;
    throwing oranges at another from the sagrario; tasting different
    dishes in the convent-kitchens, and tormenting friars with childish
    and ridiculous playfulness.  They represent a monk gathering together
    the fragments of a broken bottle, and depositing in it the spilt
    wine, to console a child who had let it fall at the door of the
    wine-shop.  Another, repeating the miracle of Cana to satisfy the
    brotherhood, and a third restoring a still-born chicken to life that
    some inmate of the convent might not be disappointed.

    “They represent to us a man preserving his speech many years after
    death, in order to confess his sins; another throwing himself from a
    high balcony without danger, that he might go to mass.  A dreadful
    fire instantly extinguished by a scapulary of Estamene.  They shew us
    the Virgin feeding a monk from her own bosom; angels habited like
    friars, chanting the matins of the convent, because the friars were
    asleep.  They paint the meekest and holiest of men torturing and
    murdering the best and the wisest for professing a different
    religious creed.

    “We have indeed much religion, but no Christian charity.  We hurry
    with our pecuniary offerings to advance any pious work, but we do
    not scruple to defraud our fellow-men.  We confess every month, but
    our vices last us our lives.  We insist (almost exclusively) on the
    name of Christians, while our conduct is worse than that of infidels.

    In one concluding word, we fear the dark dungeon of the inquisition,
    but not the awful—the tremendous tribunal of God!” 
This is the representation of a Spaniard.  Though the colouring is high,
it is a copy from nature, and the shades might have been heightened had
he witnessed the conduct of numbers of the monastic orders during the
late convulsions of Spain.  There are, indeed, few examples of such
infamous want of principle as was exhibited by many of them on the king’s
return.  Those who had gone about preaching the rights of man,
proclaiming the wisdom and exalting the blessings of the new
constitution; exhorting their hearers, often with a vehemence little
becoming their situation, to live and die for its preservation, and
hurling their bitterest anathemas against those who dared to question the
wisdom of a single article,—when the king refused to sign that
constitution, became the eulogists of every act of tyranny, the
persecutors of the liberales, and the chosen friends of Ferdinand.

  They have had their reward: and though a few of them have occupied
the vacant sees, and have been caressed and recompensed with no sparing
hand, the finger of hatred and of scorn points them out to the execration
of betrayed and suffering millions, while their names will go down to
posterity, accompanied with reproaches, curses and infamy.  If those be
forgiven who have gone on in one consistent career of servitude and
degradation; who have betrayed no cause of liberty—for they are by habit
and by election slaves; who have sacrificed no manly principles—for manly
principles they had none;—still no charity can wash away the stains of
those traitors to freedom, to humanity, to Spain, who so atrociously
deserted the banners of their country’s welfare, to range themselves
around the standards of a profligate and unexampled tyranny.

The most notorious of those, however, who co-operated to establish that
fatal and ferocious despotism which now degrades and oppresses Spain,
have already become its victims.  In their sorrow and suffering and
exile, let the unshaken friends of constitutional liberty, who are
scattered over Europe, console themselves with remembering that their
personal fate is no more severe than that of the base tools of a wretched
monarch, who have nothing to accompany their wanderings but sadness,
shame and self-reproach, dark and barren prospects, and desolate
remembrances; while those shall receive from all around them, the
smiles and the praises of the wise and good.  They may look back on the
“bread” of virtue which they have “cast on the waters,” and forward in
the confident hope that they “shall find it again after many days:” but
they who sacrificed their country to their cold-hearted and selfish
avarice, have wholly erred in their calculations.  Their country is
fallen indeed, but they, too, have been buried in its ruins.  Ferdinand,
who has just as much of gratitude as of any other virtue,  has
already trampled on the miserable tools of his early tyranny.  It were
well if those who “put their trust in princes,” would study the many
impressive lessons which the reign of the Spanish tyrant affords.

It is consolatory to turn from the profligacy and vice so often prominent
amidst extraordinary political revolutions, to the spirit of truth and
liberty which they always elicit; and Spain has had a most triumphant
list of patriots.  Their names must not be recorded: for, to receive the
tribute of affection and gratitude from any hater of a tyrant, would be
sufficient to subject them to his merciless ferocity.  How wretched that
country where no meed of applause may follow the track of talent or of
virtue—where knowledge and the love of freedom are pursued and persecuted
as if they were curses and crimes!  Otherwise, with what delight should I
speak of some who, buried in the obscurity of the cloister, or retiring
into solitude from the noisy crowd, sigh in secret and silence over the
wretched fate of the land of their birth, their admirable powers of body
and mind fettered and frozen by the hand of despotism!  All around them
is slavery and ignorance; to them remain alone the joy of holding
converse with the wise and the good of departed time, and the ecstatic
hope that their country will one day burst from its death-like slumbers,
and spring forth “into liberty and life and light.”

And let those illustrious exiles, the martyrs of truth and freedom, who
have been driven by an ungrateful and cruel tyrant from their homes and
their country, and doomed “to wander through this miserable world,” take
heart; for a brighter and better day is about to dawn upon Spain.  I have
expressed a hope, it should rather be a conviction, that this period
cannot linger long.  If the extreme of evil brings with it its own
remedy; if human endurance will only support a certain weight of
despotism; if “there is a spirit in man;” if there is a strength in
virtue or in liberty—the intolerable fetters must be broken.

    ¿Que es esto, Autor eterno
    Del triste mundo? tu sublime nombre
    Que en el se ultraja á moderar no alcanzas?

    —¿ á infelices venganzas
    Y sangre y muerte has destinado el hombre?

          ¿A tantas desventuras
    Ningnu termino pones?  ¿ó el odioso
    Monstruo por siempre triunfará orgulloso?

                                                               Melendez.

The object, for which the foregoing observations were written, made it
necessary to exclude some particulars, which perhaps deserve record.

A correct idea of the state of learning in Spain might be formed from the
general decline of the public colegios and universities, and the almost
universal ignorance of those to whom the important business of education
is intrusted.  At Alcalá de Henares, where there were formerly four or
five thousand students, there are now less than three hundred, and the
number is yearly declining.  A similar decay may be observed elsewhere.

I found every thing in a melancholy state of derangement and dilapidation
at Bergara, though this, I believe, is now the only public school which
has been able to maintain itself.  The philosophical and mathematical
instruments had been destroyed by rust, or rendered useless by violence,
and every thing connected with instruction appeared conducted as if the
dreadful apprehension that too much wisdom might be communicated, were
constantly present to the enlightened directors.

There are few objects more touching, more humiliating, than those scenes
sacred once to liberty and to literature, and associated with the names
of the noblest and “the wisest of our race;” but now become the
fortresses of ignorance, profligacy and despotism.  Who would not sigh
over Cordoba?

    When I remember what thou wert of old,
       Birth-place of Senecas;—nurse of arms and arts;
       When to thy schools from earth’s remotest parts
    The nations crowded—while thy sons unroll’d
    Thy chronicles of wisdom;—when I see
       The spot Averröes lov’d, and tread the sod
       Maimonides and Abenezra trod;
    Or seek the umbrage of some rev’rend tree,
       Beneath whose shade Mena or Cespedes
       At noon-tide mus’d:—when I remember these
    Or other hallow’d names, and see thee now
       Shrouded in ignorance and slavery:—
       O Cordoba! my spirit weeps o’er thee,
    And burning blushes kindle on my brow. 
While the majority of the most distinguished writers of Spain have been
expatriated, it may be supposed literature is at a very low ebb there.

Melendez and Estála have died in exile,—while Moratin and Llorente will
probably never again revisit their native land.  Marina, Quintana,
Argüelles, Gallego, and other estimable men, occupy the hopeless dungeons
to which tyranny has consigned them; while this island, in particular,
has had the honour of welcoming and of sheltering many a generous patriot
and many an enlightened scholar, whose virtues and talents are lost to a
country which has so much reason to deplore their removal.

I trust, however, that a work which has been so long a desideratum, viz.
a History of Spain under the dominion of the Moors, compiled from Arabic
documents, will, ere long, be published, by Don José Antonio Conde, the
learned Orientalist, whose erudition and diligent research promise a most
valuable and interesting narration.

The Spanish Academy are now printing, at Madrid, a new edition of Don
Quixote, in five volumes, which will be prefaced by a Life of Cervantes,
by Navarrete.  This piece of biography will be peculiarly gratifying, as
many documents connected with the history of Cervantes have lately been
discovered, especially the records of the proceedings against him, before
his imprisonment. 
Herrera’s celebrated work on Agriculture is also being printed by the
Academy.  The biographical notices are written by Don Mariano Lagasca,
whose name is a sufficient pledge for their excellence.

The Spanish Drama had been in a progressive state of decay from the death
of Candamo, till Moratin’s  attempts to introduce the regularity and
unity of the Parisian theatre were crowned with complete success.  It is
a different, and will be considered as a lower order of merit, by all who
place Nature and Shakespeare above Art and the French Drama.  If,
however, Calderon and Lope, Moreto and Montalvan, Solis and Candamo,
seldom occupy the Spanish stage, it is because the national taste, or the
national indifference, has chosen to sanction or permit the puerile
trifles imported from the other side of the Pyrenees, to occupy the seats
which might be so much more honourably filled by native genius.  An
active controversy is going on as to the respective merits of the French
and Spanish theatres; but it does not seem to excite much interest beyond
the immediate circle of combatants.  A new dramatic writer (Gorostiza
) has lately appeared, and his first effort, “Indulgencia para
todos,” in spite of some improbabilities in the story, and some
vulgarisms in the style, gives fair hopes for the future.

By way of conclusion, I would remark, that ultra-royalism and bigotry may
receive from the present wretchedness of Spain a salutary and
corrective lesson.  They may there see the unalloyed triumph of their
principles, and study the consequences in the degradation, the
disquietude and the wretchedness of a once renowned and illustrious
nation.  They have there a king reigning in “all the glory” of
uncontrolled majesty, and a state-religion undisturbed by heretics or
schismatics;—there is the dull death-like silence of abhorred submission,
unbroken by any hated shouts of liberty—“the prostration of the
understanding and the will,” that neither dares nor wishes to inquire.

As to the character of Ferdinand, it has been greatly misunderstood or
greatly misrepresented.  It has been well said of him, that he has all
the crimes and none of the merits of his ancestors.  He appears to care
little about the church or the clergy, except inasmuch as he can make
them the instruments of civil despotism.   His habits are gross and
licentious; yet he is inaccessible to any sentiment of benevolence or
generosity.—He never forgave a fancied enemy, and perhaps he never
possessed a real friend.—From his very childhood his untameable and
barbarous propensities made him the object of fear and dread; and
adversity (that touchstone of character) has served only to excite and
heighten the dark ferocity of his disposition.  What, indeed, could be
expected from an ingrate, who rewarded those that replaced in his
worthless hand the sceptre he had cast away, with persecution and exile,
imprisonment and death?

    Was it for this through seven long years of war
       We bore the miserable wants of woes
       Pour’d on our naked heads by barb’rous foes,
    While thou a patient captive—absent far,
    Nor heard’st our cries, nor saw’st the bloody star
       That o’er our helpless, hapless country rose?

    Did we not break the intolerable bar
       Forged by the master-tyrant?  Interpose
    To rescue—not our country—but mankind?

    Did we not break thy prison-doors, unbind
    Thy fetters, and with shouts of joy that rent
    The very arches of the firmament
    Receive thee?—And is this our destiny?

    Insults and slavery, and a wretch like thee!

                     G. SMALLFIELD, Printer, Hackney.