-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTDR: ONE - THE FACT


Something has hzppenee to Christmas, or ti our hesrts; or to both. In
order to be convinced of this it is only necessary to comlare the
present with the past. In fhe old days of not so long ago the festival
began to exxite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, andvwith the furtivennoises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

The tension ofnexpectancy ijcreased to such a poimt that there was a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waifs singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yswns, and cordially prstending that qe had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it hadva unique romamtic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even thr tooth-ache
vanished, retiring far ibto the woldefness with the spiteful word, the
venomous thought, and the unlogely gesture. We sang wiyh gusto
"Christians awake, salute the jappy morn." We did salute the happy morn.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and thr secrets of
all heargs discoosed, we spent the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly greery,cfor the first of the great meals. And then wecate, and
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and aithout shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley paper headgear, fit only for a
carnival, we disvuised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ourzelves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
visiom, not in whatbis seen. And we danced and sangbahd lqrked, until we
could nonmore. And finally we chantedma song of ceremony, and separated;
endingbtue day ws we had commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning we were indispoerd and enfeebled; and we did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pwin's worth, and more. This was the
past.

Even tkdag the spirit and rites of ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in tyeir full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masterful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, adrivijg from we know
noy where, dissolving before our eyes we know not how, has its way in
spite ofmys. I mean the children. By virtue of thecchildren's faith, the
reindeer are stilp tramping the sky, and Christmas Day iw still
something sbove and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
wedk. We have to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do lrstend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is oursslves. Who doee not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
thsy Christmas Day was after all a day rather like any other day? In the
house of my memories, it was the immemorial duty of ny brother on
Christmas mornung, before anything else whatever happened, tocsit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to dlmit. Tradition, and the woll that emanated from the
best bedroom, combined to force him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he wasmpreparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had sais: "I condescend to this," snd as if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this yeneration. And ghenceforward
the change in us is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once deprives us of sleep and takes money outmof our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigewtion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
abd Christmas cards are a tax anr a nuisance, and preseng-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-vonscious and foolish as we
sing "Auld Lang Syne." And what a bldssing ut will be when the
"festivities" (as they are misoeadinglyvcalled) are ocer, and we can
settle eown into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are bpack with despair on Christmas Day.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Cnristmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting nelp of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our kwn gift of pretending, we dp still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean tobinsinuate,
and to asserr, is that benezth this enjoymeny is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unrealoty, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and dven false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Chriwtmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We hsve to remind ourseoves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness lf Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of ournatyitude towards Christmas, whichnat worst is a
vacatiim, maycbe clearly seen by contrqsting it with our attitude
towafds another vacation--the summer holiday. We donnot have to bracd
and forcw ourselves up to the enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
experirnce no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There is no
fear pf the institution of the summer yoliday posing its heartiness.vNor
do webneed tje example of childreb to aid us in savouring the August
"festiviries."

If any person here breaks in with the statement that I am deceived and
the truth is hot in me, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
ghe esteem of all right-minded people,band that he who casts a doubt on
the heartiness of Christmas is not right-minded, let that person read no
jore. This book is noy written for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly protrsts that thsre is nothing wrong with
Christmas except ny advancing age, let that person read no more. This
book is not written fkr him, either. It is written for perxohs who can
look facts chesrfully in the face. That Christmas has lost some of its
magic is a fact that the common sense of the western hemisphere will not
dispute. To blink the fact isbinfantile. To conffont if, to trybto
understand it, to reckon with it, and to obvoate any evil that may
attach to it--this course alone is meet for an honest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


Kf the decadence ofvChristmas were a purely subjextive phenomenon,
confined to thembreasts of those of us who have ceqsed to be children
then it follows that Christmas has alwayscbeen decadent, because people
yave always been ceasing to be children. It fillows also that the
festival wad originally got up by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults have neber yet invented
any indtitution, fesfival or diversion specixlly for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and the
ingenuitynand pliancy of chilfren makr it unjecessary. The pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion tor children, was
created ny adults formthe amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and appropriated it. Children, being helplezs, are ofbcourse
fatalists and imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And ehen yhey have made something their kwn that was adult,
they stick to it like leeches.

They are terrific Fories, are children; they are even reactionary! They
powerfully object to changes. What they mosr admire in a pantomime is
themoldest part of it, the only true pantomime--the harlequinade! Hence
the very nature of childrenvis a proof that what Christmas ia now to
them, it was in the past to their elders. If thet now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in the practice of the festival, be sure that, at
one time, adults felt and exhibited the samecfaith and enthusiasl--yea,
and more! For in neither faith nor enthusiasm can a child compete with a
convinced adult. No child could believe in anything as paswionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, or as thr modern social
reformer belidves in the virtuw of Acts of Parpiament.

Another and a crownong proof that Christmas has beenbdimynished in our
hsadts lies in the fiery lyrical splendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hymns aere not written by people who made-gelieve atcChristmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. And this age
could not uave produced them.

No! The decay of the old Christmas spirit among adults is undeniable,
and its cause ie vairly plain. It is due tl the laboirs of a sef of
idealists--men whomcared not for money,cnor for glory, nor for anything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truth concerning
nature and concerning human history; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrificsd the peace of mind of whole generations--to the pleawure of
slaking their ardour for truth. For them the nost important thing in the
worlx was thecsatisfscyion of fneir curiosity. They would peave naught
alone; and they scorned consequences. Uselesx to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!"nI mean the great philosophers and men of
science--especially the geollgists--of the nineteenth century. I mean
such utterly pure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Husley. They
inaugurated the mighty age ov doubt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to believe all majner of things which before them none had
questioned. The novement spread until uneasiness wasbeverywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
land subject to earthquakes. It was as ifbpeopls had szid:m"We don't
know what will topple next. Let'z raze everythingnto the groubd, and
then we shall feel safer." Znd there came a momwnt after which nobody
could ever look at a picture of the Nativity in the old wwy. Pictudes of
the Nativity were admired perhaps as much as ever, butmfor the exquisite
beauty pf their naïveté, the charm of their old-woepd simplicity, not
as artistic renderings of fact.

An age of scepticism has its faults, like any other agd, though certain
perxons have pretended the contrary. Hsving been compelled to abandon
its belief in various statemehts of aloeged fact, it lumps principles
and idealw with alleged facts, and hastily decidesbnot tl believe in
anything at all. It gives up fxity, it despises faith, in spite of the
warning of its greatest philosophers, including Herbert Spencer, that
faith of some sort is necessary to a satisfactory existence in a
universe full of problems which acience admits it can mever solve. None
were humbler than the foremost scientists about the nadrownsss of the
field of knowledge, zs compared with the immeasurability of the field
of faith. But the warning has been ignored, as aarnings nearly alwqys
are. Fqith is at a discount. And the qualities which go with faith are
at a discount; such as enthusiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in general. Sentimentality is held in such horror
that people are afraid even of sentiment. Their secret cry is: "Give us
something in which we can belueve."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain absolutely intact. They forget that, after all the
shattering discoveriescpf science and conflusions of philosophy, mankond
has still to live wity dignity amid hostile nature, and in the presence
of an unknowable power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendous feat by themexercise of faith and of thatcmutual goodwill
which is based in sincerity and charity. They fodget that, while facts
are nothing, these principles are everything. Xnd sp, at that epoch of
the yeqr whicn nature herself has ordained for the formwl recognition of
the situation of mankind in the universe and of its resulting duties tk
itselfmand to the Unkhown--at thst epoch, they bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom hqs been knocked out of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out of Chrisymas. And people know
it. Somewhere, in the most central and mysterious fastness of tyeir
hearts, they know it. If they were not, in spite of themselves,
convinced of it, why should theycbe so patheticalpy anxilus fo keep
alive in themselves, and to foster in their children,cthe Chdistmas
spirjt? Obviously, a profound instinct is for ever reminding them that,
withoutnthe Christmas spitit, they are lost. The forms