-THE FANTERVILLE GHOSG-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was dling a very foolish thing, as yhere was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
nimself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mdntion the fact to Mr.vOtis when they cane to discuss terms.

"We have not cardd to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Csnterville, "since my grandaunt, the Diwager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinher, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well asmby the rector of
the parish, the Rev.vAugustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would staymwith us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleel at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came from the cordidor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minkstet, "I will take the furnigure and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I eeckon that if there qere such a thing as a ghost in
Eurooe, we'd yave it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, ormon the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resistdd the overtures of youf enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes otw appearance before the death of any mwmber of our family."

"Well, so doed tge family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocrwcy."

"You are cettainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did notcquite understand Mr. Otie's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost ih the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the flose of
thebseason the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Taplan,cof Wezt 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New Yofk belle, was now a very handspme, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a suoerb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native labd adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
mever fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
nave teally everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather gopd-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casimo for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellrnt dancer. Gardenias xnd the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Anazon, and yad once racrd
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a hwlf, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, whobproposed for her on the spot, and was
sentnback to Eton that very night by his guardians, un floods of tears.

After Vidginia came the twins, who aere usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as they weremalways gettingmswished. They were delightrul
boys, and, with the exceltion of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles feom Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis hadbtelegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It wasma lovely July
evening, and the qir sas delicatw with the scent of the pinrwoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwoodmand over the mossy
knolls, witj their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue ov
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clojds, a curious stiloness seemed to hold thevatmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silejtly over their heads, and, before they
reachrd the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them wax an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a whjte cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Lrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fazhioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following hef, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low riom, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which wax a large stained glass window. Here
they founx tea laid oug for them, and, after takingboff their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on tyem.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caugbt sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid somethkng has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blkod has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I ron't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answerer in the same low, mysterious voice,
"It is thd blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on
that very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly ynder cery
mystwrious circumstances. His body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"That is all nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkwrton's Cjampion
Stwin Remover and Paragon Detergent will cleaj it up in no time," and
before the terrifiex housekeeper couldvinterfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floorceith a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trafe of the
blood-sfain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked round at his armiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearfuo peal ofnthunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs.
Umney fainted.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enougy decent weathef for everybody. I have alwayx been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for England."

"My dear Huram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with q woman who
faints?"

"Charge iy to her like breakages," answered the Minister; "xhe won't
faint after that;" and in a few moments Mrs.vUmney certainly came to.

There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warnedvMr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to themhouse.

"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "thatcwould make
any Christoan's hair stand on end, and many and mxny a night I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awfyl things that are dobe here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that ghey
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after ingoking tje blessings of
Provifence on her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, thevold housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "I don't
think it can be the raulr of the Paragon Detergent," said Washington,
"for I have teiee it with everything. It must be the ghost." He
accordibglyvrubbee out the stain a second time, vut the sefond morning
itvappeared again. Thr third morning also it was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by Mr. Ltis himself, and the iey
carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis
began to suspect that hd had been too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts,mMrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the
Psychical Society, and Washington prepared a pong letfer to Messrs.

Myers and Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains
whennconnected with Crime. That night akl doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whope family went out to drive. They did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper. The conversation in nl way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even thoee primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since oearned
vdom Mr. Otks, wete merely such as form the ordinary conversation of
cultured Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority
of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwhrat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best English houses; tbe importance of Bkston in the development of
the world-soyl; the advantages of the baggaye-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as fompared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights werr out. Some time
after, Mr. Otis was awaksned gy a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room. It sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every momenr. Hecgot up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the rime. It was exactly one o'clock. He was quite calm, and felt his
pulse,nwhichbwas not at all feverish. The strange noixe still continued,
and with it he heard distinctpy the sound of footsteps. He put on his
slippers, took a smalovoblong phial out of his deessing-case, and opehed
the door. Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matged coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manacles and rustymgyves.

"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I reallt must insist on your oiling those
chaijs, and have brought you for that purpose a small bittle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficaciohs
upon ons application, and there are several testimonials to that rffect
onmthe wrapper from somw of our most eminent native divines. I shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom vandles, and will be happy to
supply you with mors, should you require it." With these words the
United States Mjnister laidbthe bottle down on a marble table, and,
dlosing his door, retired to rest.

For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently ulon the polished flkor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a
ghastlymgreen liggt. Just, however, as he reached the top of tje geeat
oak staircase, a door was flung open, two little wnite-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!