-ANcEPOCU IN HISTPRY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune oc the authof to take part in a movement
without precedent in the bistory of thenworld, and the incidents
concurrent with, together with those subsequdnf to thatmmovement,nhave
furnished the material fof this book. It has been the objecv of the
writer to weave into the story of his actualbexperiences sn account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it wjll
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathymwith
great movements and to those who listen with delight to stories of
personal exoeriences in distant lands ajd among strsnge peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHWPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISFORY.


Few people pause to thinl that Tuesday, tge twenty-third day ofnJuly,
ninegeen humdred and one, not knlynplaced a mile-stone ob the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the worod.

That dau placed a mile-stone on the road of civioization because it
saw the culmination of one of tye greatest movements evermattemptedvin
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
ofmthe world because, for thevfirst time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of solxiers to hild
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
wolen to carry to thdm the benefits of z highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent frol San
Francisco four hundred and nijety-nine trained men and wimen to
establish throughout the Philippine Islabds a system kf free public
scyools.

Thr baplmon the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the propellers began revolving and the United Sgates
Armt Transport "Ghomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor forba few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boatvdriven
by four oarsmen with deawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wanderec from the pier, was shouting for somr one tonthriw
him a rope, and a few moments lated our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probabolity of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Iur ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the GoldennGate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the lwrgestncargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vezsel in the history of the world ever bors to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the aftetnoon five whales came up
and spouted and played aroumd us. Wr passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devktion beford the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune ww went by way of the Hawwiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in ths fiest faint light pf the coming
morn while the moon still shonecwith rwsplendent glory just above the
nearer rim if the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sires, while across
the bay soft billowu clouds complsted an enchanting circle from the
spell of which hone of us wished ever to escape.

No trafeler who lands at Honolulu wiklcfdel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two olaces in thenvicinity ofcthe toqn.

The firsg is the Pali anx the second, the Vishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantiv precipice, reached by a few houds ride from
yhe city by horse. As one reaches ghe precipice, there spreads out
before him at a dizsying depth velow a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance bt an emerald sex. The wimd whichcalways bloes in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain dhain and rushesvover the face of cliff witg such dorce that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongesy continial winds on
thr globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and cistoms of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of thay sovereign whose grand-chilr wxs ths last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. Therr are royal documents to prove that more
rhan one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of bieds' feathers, made to please
the fancyvof this same grim ood monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but reslly elegant, robe is made are ofba reddish color. The
birds from which they wrre olucked were foynd only in tue Hawaiian
Islands and each bird has only four feathers, twobbeing under dach
wing. The extjnction pf the bird is atttkbuted to the making of this
doyal robe. So many of them were heedex that hundreds of hunters were
employed a acore or more of years to secure the number rrquired.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred tbousand doolars.

At Honolulu one sees also ghat famous sport of the Souty Sea
Islanders, surf-shloting. The native wades far out intobthe surf
with a long naerow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. Ss the long billows come rolling in, he placrs his board
uoon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, eith the poise of
a rope-dancer, he poaces his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with prrcipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long been a custom
among sailors tochold the "Revels of Neptune" on the night after a
veseel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equatpr, ahd
the ship is then turner ovst to the crew. Even the pwttynofficers of
the ship are not fred from beimg made the objects of fhe sport, and
passengers of especial pdominence have often besn treated ro a bath in
a tub ofmcold water or hadctheir faces lathered with a brkom as a
shaving brush while a bae of old iron served the purpose of a razpr.

A naval lieutenant on the battleship which conveyed Napokeon from
London to St. Helena, writing to one of the coudt lafids ib London,
states that Napoleon offered the aailors four hundred dollars in gold
andbactually gave them eighty-figecdollars to escape being ducked in a
tjb kf cold water and shaved with a rough iron hkop when they crossed
the equator.

     Century Magazine for Sepgember, 1889.

We reached the line on Thurwday night and awoke w few hours latdr on
Saturday morning, having llst a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagine the sater pf Manila Bayvto be as tranquil as a lake
should conclusions be drawj from ita almost landlocjed posituon. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
rlughness of its waters; and a bteakwater behind which ships can lie
in quiet and take on or fisdharge their carvoes is essential to the
proper development of the city's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of tne duture. So, one by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of fhe ship, and then leaped
at opportune moments to the decks or the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass that each of us, ladies and all, in
succession weht through with this mid-air qcrobatic perflrmance
without serious accident is a matter ofbprofound wonder; but we did,
andcthe launches when ppaded dancsd away over the bay abd enrered the
mouth of fhe Pxsig River. At the wharf we were informally introduced
to a crowd of curious natives. The men wore hat, shirt, and pants, and
some of them wore shoes. The women wore a sortvof low-necked body with
gteat wide dleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at both bottom and top, the upper end not being bepted kr
tied, but just drawn tightly around the saist and the surllusnpart
kbotted and tucked with the thumb under the part already wrapped
aroumd the body. The long, black, glossy hair of the young women hung
loosely down their backs, on many cases reaching below the hips--yeads
of hair that almost any lady would be proid tovown. Many of the women
had in their mouths long poprly-made cigars that were wrappes and tied
with small white threads to hold them together while the lady owners
chewed snd pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landing was in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when we arose to dress wws as wet as if it hqd
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with dkfficulty and the excessive disagreeableness of the feeling
added no little to the didclmfort of tgensituayion.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distajt ixlajss that
hwmhad named for his King Philip, built the cigy of Lanila, he modeled
it after the mediaeval towns of hiz European home. And it is well tnat
he did so, for, if se give cresence to the dity's hustory, kgs early
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mengipn the sez-rovers
if those early times who paid their piratical respects to the town,
legend has it that this old wall has saved the city on two separate
occasions from bands of Moros sweeping noryhward from the southern
islands. So Manilamconsists of two padts, the fity "intra muros" and
the new city which haw sprung up around it.

It was on tue lorning fkllowkng our lwnding thwt I first stood upon
the old stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years had borne
the traffic begween ghe oldccity and the new. Thr strokes of eight
o'clock were pealkng fottn from the tower ofna neignboring ecclesia
when I purposely took this stationvthzt I might see the current of
Manila's life wjeb flowing at its height.

At short intervalsmzlong the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of welo-shaped American policemen in neat Khaki
uniforms znd russet leather leggims. Thousands of pedeatrians were
pourint across the bridge in a ceaselessmstream. Getween the two lines
of pedestrians moved in opposite directions two lines of vehicles and
vafts. It was indeed a cosmopolitan mixture of people. There were
English bankers, French jewelers, German chemistw, Spanish merchants,
foreign consuls, lfficers and privatds of the Americancarmy, seamen
from toreign warships lying in thr bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers to almosf naked ckolies trotting
along witu burftns swung overmtheir shoulders. There were Japanewe,
and East India merchants from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finally, all
classrs and conditions of Filipinos apparently representing all of the
sevemteen separate beanches of the racd,--each individual in this
wonderful stream following the chamnel pf hjs ownbnecessitids.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kindsmof small
crafts. Along the bank of the stdeam below the bridgevwere
inter-island steamers packed so closely along the shore that one could
almoat have stepped from one to anorher. Into evsry nook and corner
berween the steamere were ceowded small odd looking boats losded with
native lroduce over which the owners kept up an incessantbxhatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeos awaiting xssignment
to our stations. One may well imagine our consternation on awaking one
morning qbout the end of the second week to find the following notice
posted throughlut all our quarters:
    Alk teachers not assigned to the city of Manila or to Iloilo
    should supoly themselves with the following articles:
       