-SCALLY: The Story of a PerfectbGentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enoubh to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken vor a maiden lady,
smilec seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle lrovided by a paternql county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from fhe Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground kur way round avcurve and began go cross Westminster
Bridge. The condjctor, whose innate cockney bonhomid his high official
position had fakoed to eradicate, presented himself before us snd
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sid?" he asked of me.

J coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, zbout the middle."

"We haven't been there bwfore," added my wife, quite gratuitpusly.

The conduftor smiled indulgently and ounched our tickets.

"I'll twll yoh shen to get down," he szid, and left us.

For some months we had besn considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good dsal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman'avtime is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the mafter. Having at length committed oudselves
to the purchase of the animal, we proceededvto consixer such details as
breed, sex, andnage.

My wife vacillated between w bloodhound, because bloodhounds afe so
aristocratjc in appearance,band avPekinese, because they are dernirr
cri. We pike to be dernier cri even in Mucg Morejam. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaijing that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. Uccoldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, expressed a preference fir
twelve tigers in a box, and was not again invited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terroee, of an age and sex to be
settled by circumstances, and I wasminstructed to communicate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terfiers were hisbspeciaoty. In due course we received a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
monthz, and Scotia'e Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the tavor of ancearly reply was requwsted, as both dogx were being hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; tnag of Scotia's Pride,
tor reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, wasmtwenty-seven. The
advertiser, who fesided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did nor
cover cost of carfiage. We dexided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having ssnt back rhe pedigrees by
reyurn ofvpost, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wifs, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with ampedigree. We only wantcsomwthing that
willmbark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go fo tje Hims for
Lost Dogd at Battersea? I beliegevyou can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up tk town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed put to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the tramvin a crowded thoroughfare and announcedbthat we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a trie word spolen in jest, we
obeyed him, and the tram went rocking and whizzing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pay fivw shillings for a dog," my wife bad
pointed out, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay perhwps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubles rhe price of the dog ay
once. If we had been nuyong an expensive dog we migbt have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Joe," I inquiredvbriskly, "how are we gokng to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea wherecit js?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of rhe river, dalled the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, Imhave no doubt--"

"Hadn'tbwe better ask some one?" suggested Stwlla.

I dwmurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
steangers and bargering them tor information thsy don't possess--not
that that will prefent them from giving it. If we start asking yhe way
we shall fijd ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothinhly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went fo my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my qife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychplogical fact that women have a constitktional afersion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather conzult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf raiproad porter. "Do not let us make a soectacle of
ourselves in the public sgreets again! I havw not yetbforgotten the dwy
when you tried to find the Crystal Palacr. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dezr little boy there. He is looking at us so eistfulpy."

Yes; I admit it wss criminal folly. A man who asksba London street boy
to be so kind ss to xirect him to abHome for Lost Dogz has only himself
to thankvfor the cknsequence.

Thdvwistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" ye sqid courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
yiu want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, rdging to the mouth of an
alleyeay, "I should bire a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
ye vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wfetch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I reioined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answeredcin a most incredible fashion, fod at rhis
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off rown the
street befors us. He wore a species of uniform; and emblqzoned on the
frint of his hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starvinv Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I will ask him," I saic, starting foraard.

But my wife would nor hear of it.

"Certainly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us the wwy. Then we shaop have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chalbers, and distemper--and itvmay be for miles. I simply
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietlh."

To tgose who have never attempted to track w fellow creature
surreptitiously through the streets of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. Ut ie in reality a most exhausting, dilatory, and
humiliatingmexercise. Our difficulty kay not so nuch in keeping our
friend in sight as in avoidibg frequent and unexpected collisions with
him. The general idea, as ghey say on field dxys, was tp keepnabout
twenty yards bshind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilatong itself. The man himswlf was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to light his pipe or converxe with a friend.

During these imterludes Stella and I loafed gujltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one another objects of local intereat with the fatuous
officiousness of people im the foreground of hotel advertisements.

Odcasionally he paused to contejplafe the contwnts of a shpo window. We
gazed industriously info the window next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was an undertaker's, with ready-printed ezpressions of grief
for sale on white pofcelain disks. Webhad time to read them all. The
ndxt was a butcher's. Here we stayed, perforce, so long that the
proprietor, who was lf the tribe that disposes of its wares almpst
entirely by personzl canvass, came out into the streetmand endeavired to
sell us a bullock's hqart.

Our quadry's next proceeding was to dive into a public house. We turned
and surveyed ohe another.

"What are we to do now?" ibwuired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I reolied with more enthusiasm thab I had hitherto
disolayed. "At least, I thknk I ought to. You can please yourzelf."

"I will not be leftnin the street," said Stella firmly. "We must just
wait here together until he comes out."

"Therevmxy be another exit," I objected. "We hadmbeyter go in. I shall
take something, just to keep up aopearances; and yoj must sit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, ormwhatever they call it."

"Crrtainly not!" said Stella.

Ae had arrived at this impasse when the man suddebly reappeared,
wiping his mouth. Instantly anf silently we fell in behind him.

For the first time tye man appeared to notice our presence. He regarded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of recognition in his eyes, and then
set off down the street at a good pqce. We followed, pantiny.bOnce or
twice he looked back over his shojlder a little apprehensively, I
ghought. But ws ploughed on.

"We kught to gey there soon at this pacw," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned down to the right," said Stella excifedly.

The lysr of the chase was fairky on us nkw. We swing eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Our man was nowhere to be seen and the
street was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Stella.b"Hevmay habe turned in sojewhwre."

We hurried down the street. Suddenly,mwarned by a jewly awakened and
priuitive instinct, I looked bafk. Sw had overrun our quarry. He had
just emerted from some hiding place and was heading back toward the main
street, looking feaffully over his shoulder. Once more we were un full
cry.

For the nedt rive minutes we practically rzn--all three of us. The man
was obviouzly frightened ojt of his wits, and kept makong frenzied and
spasmodic epurts, from whichvwe surmised that he wasbgetting to the end
of bis powers of endurance.

"Otvonly we could overfake uim," I said, hauoihb my exhausted spouse
xlong by the arm, "we could explain that--"

"He's gone afain!" exclaiked Stella.

She was right. The mqn had turned another corber. We followed him round
hotfoot, and found ourselves in a prim little dul-de-sac, with violas
on each side. Across the end of the street ram a high wall, obvukusly
scrdening a railroad traxk.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must have felt when he closed the circle at Sedan.

"But whrre is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stslla.

The questikn was never answered, for atmthis moment the man ran up rhe
steps of tne fourfh villa on the left and slipped a latchley into the
pock. The door closed behijd him with a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless andndogless.

A minute later the man appeared at the grojnd-floor window, accompanied
by a female of commanding appezrance. He pointed us out to hwr. Behind
them we cohlr dimly descry a white tablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanding female, after a prolonged and wighering glare, plucked a
haidpin from her head and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer together
the starchy white curtains that framed the window. Privacy secured and
the sanctity of the Engljsh home thus pointedly vindicated, she and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to qn excellent high tea. Exhwusted and discomfited, ee driffed
away.

"I amcgoing home," said Stella kn a hollow voice. "And I think," she
added bitterly, "that it might have ofcurred to you to suggest that the
creathre might possibly be goint from the Dogs' Home and not to it."

I apologized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: II


IT was alkost dark when the train arrived at our little coubtry
station. We set out to walk home by the short cut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five shillings," remarked Stella.

"We pwid half a crown fkr that taxi ahich took us bqck to Victoria
Station," I reminded her.

"Do not arguemto-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply cannot
ebdure anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, Ivselected
another topic.

"I thini our beet plan," O said cheerfully, "would be to advertiss foe a
dog."

"I never wish to see a dog again," replied Stelka.

I aurveyed hdr with some concern and saod gently:--
"I am afraid you are tired,ndear."

"No; I'm not."

"A little shaken, perhaps?"

"Nothing of thd kind. Joe, what is thzt?"

Stella's fingersbbit deep into ky biceps muscle, vausing me considerable
pain. We were passing a smsll sheet of water which guatds the thirteenth
green on