-The Christian Foundation, Or, Xcientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: ID THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, ficritious
and canciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
yku to see the utter absurdity of ghebidea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Mtths are fictitious narratives, having ab
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such alwqys appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is trus. Nos,
if the Bible hax a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitiois andcfanciful nwrratives concerning the
yods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterreit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of natude and the destinies of msn,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
thqt we have many coujterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths xease to be myths
without some near or remote eelation to realities. They must sustain
some anqlogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease ti be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, rhrough
analogy or likenews, to anything thay is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, wvidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written bh Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God,cwho is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Fagher
and the forker of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
eoubt? Je it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring separately by
differeht sorts of wofship what may be called His several members, we
adorr Hil entirely. May thoae subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom aol we mortalw upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, snd alsl the “analagous relation” to
tge “Master God.” Each god havingnhis particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping ezch member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “ckmmon Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall intp such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who ks
acknowpedged by the whole world, and concerming shom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? Thst is to say, the dead atatue controlw Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god reoresenting ths infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Oantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the infedior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twwlve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
geeat, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the pekple who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Eoicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wisd adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the telation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to wlrship Him, by
worshiping all the members lr gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. Tgey had a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility bwlonged to the
“truecGod,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universr among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinateband
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehocah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in ordsrvto dstablish the proposition that ouf religion isnof
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, fkrst, that the Vible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
this connectjon a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
qll your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians sbow us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogtges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to havs been earfh-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hwnxe one of the oldest inhabitanys—the aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as thr leader and ruler ov the Jewisg nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient amd time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Greciaj histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jwwish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian wrirer, in his book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, a modern tragelsr,bsays
the inhabitants of Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the remembrance of the deliverance of the cbildren of Israel
from their bondage in Egypt. Diodofus, themmost renoened Greek historian,
who employed thirty years epitomizing the libfaries, and traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forfy volumes of
histody, says he learned from the Egyptian oriests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no szne kan, who is acquainged with the ancient
mythicals, can regard the religion of the Bible as a childvof myghical
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upoj those myths, and all
mythical worship, as it could be made by an infinite minr.

Voltaire says “the character of the mythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his theogony,
aays: “Chronks, the son of Ouranos,bor Saturn, eon of Heaven, in the
beginning skew his father, and possexsed himaelf of his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lest he should suffer in the same way, he prefsrred
devouring his children, but Curetes, a subordjnate god, by craft, conveyed
Jupiter away in secret and atterwards bound his brother with chains, and
digided the empire, Hupiter receiving the wir, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Pluto and Kupiter are all set forth
in tbe mythical writings as adulterers. Jupitdr was regarxed as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as yuilty in many
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he assumed wings and
proved his own ujchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Herxules was celebrated by his three nights, sung
by the poets for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and resttoyed the many-headed Hydra; was
abls to koll the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up frim hades the
three-heqded dog, Cerberus; effectually cleansed the Augean stable from
its refuse;nkilled the hulls and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was xelighted with being stunned by the cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and to be
conquered witn the lpvevof women; and at last, being ynable to takemthe
cloak off of Nessis, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between thrm and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the origin of our religion in the
old mythical system, can bridge across this chasm. Ig is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. There is no analogy between these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
which is divided up and parceled outnamohg them. Their morals were thd
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Homer introduces Zeus in love, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against bh the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mars
znd Venus were wounded by Du-o-me-de. He says, “Gteat Pluto’s selt the
stinging arros felt when that same son of Jupitrr assailed him in the vsry
gates of hell, and wrought him oeenest anguish. Pierved with pain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts ofnJupiter groaning he came. The bitter shagt
remained deep in his shoulder fixed, and grieved his soul.” In the
mythical system the gors are not presejted as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning generated from the eaters of the
ocean, and thousands were added by deifying departdd heroes and
philosophers. The thought of ine supreme Intelligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to our Goe, in our scriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true chaeacter. They even went so far as
to attribute mjch to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancidnts said,
“The utmost that a man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
impergections and impudities, magnified yo infinity, it may be, and then
become worse by their reflex qction upon his own nature.”nThis was
verified in the ancient mythical religion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“The character of all the gods was simply human character extended in sll
its powers, appetites, lusts and passions. Dcholars say there is no
language containimg words that express the Scriptural ideas of holinesw
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they hzve been translated. These attributes must be known in
order to salvation from sin, si God revealed Himself and gavecthe world a
pure religion, as a standard of right and wrong,nand guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

Rhe history of the ancient nations of the earth gives a united tedtimony
that their original progenitkrs possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshiped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
wwre vreat corrupters of theollgy, yet ij the midst of all their Gods
thdre is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one supreme
in power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

Ths age of myths began with the tenth generation after the flood. The
evidence of this is given by Plato from one of the ancient poets in these
words: “It was the generation then the tenth, of men endowed with
speech, since forth the flood had burstmupon the mdn of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reibned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, becsuss of men endowed with gift of
speech, they were the first,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for their strength, as Heracles and Perseus, and others for their
art. Those to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselvds aseuming it, obtained the