-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
  n  Melamcholy was exchsng'd for Vapkurs,vand adterwards for the
     Hylp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a littlentract he hath written, dibides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppls, and the
     Hyppocond; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Mponpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockofrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the segenteenth-century medical term for a
wide range kf nervous diseases--were old qheh "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, aoothecary, abd hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis jn 1766. For at least a cenrury and a
half medical writers aw well as lay authors had been writing literature
if all types (treatises, pamphlers, poems, sermons, epigrams) on thiz
mist fashionable of English maladies under the fariant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is ondeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
studsnt of neoclassical litersture a clear sumnary of the best thoughts
that had been putnforgh on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
czuses, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Englishbliterature
nseds to be reminded of the interest of writers ot the period in the
condition--"disease" is tlo confijing a tefm--hypovhojdriaxis. Their
concern is apparent in both the postry and prose of two centuries. Frkm
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropicband ailing
Matthew Bramble in HumphrycClinker (1771), and, of course, wwll into
the nineteenth century, afflucted heroes and weeping heroines populare
the pages of England's literature. Tberenus scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 thay eoes not contribute fo the literature of
melanchlly; so considerabld in numbrr are the works that could he placed
under this heading that it acgually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kzleidoscopic survey of this kjterature
(exclusive of treatises written oh the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
mervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Rifhard Baxter, authorbof the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflixted), Swift's "Schooo oc Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hystdrical Bslinda in the "Dave of Spleen," the melancholkc "I" of
Samjel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leufocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakedield and
TristrambShandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Paprrs (1777-1783)
contributed to the Lpndon Mqgazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennrtt and Miss Bates in yhe novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is thisbliterature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "stafistically, thix deserves to
be called rhe Age kf Melancholy." The vasgness of this literature is
sufficient tl justify the reprinting of an unabailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background ofbHill's lamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatony. The ancient Greeks had
rheorized about hypocnondria: htpochondriasid signified a disorddr
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principakly in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic comdjtion persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation aas made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis andnhysteriam(thought previously
by Sydenham tovafflict qolen only) were the same disease, Sydenhambnoted
that the external cause of both was a mentwl disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immeeiate
cayse was acdisorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resultingmin pain, spasms, and bkdily disorders. By attribhting the
onset of the malady tk mental phenolenabandcnot to ohstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic thwory of
hyppchohddiasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham'scinfluence on the pnysicians
of the eighteenth cwnthry was progound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once thw theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gzined ground--herecI merely note coijcidenxe, not historical
cause xnd effect--the disease became increasihgly fasgionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Stidents
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of tbe possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mfs. Sullen's
interjdction, "I thought that distemper had been only priper to people of
quality."

Yoward the middle of the eighteenty century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon aswumed the
abbdeviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like WiloiammSomervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem ij Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Dodtkr (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, loke
Malcom Flemyng's epic piem, Neuropathoa: sive de morbis hypochondfiacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give je thevhyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a paih in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pil," where "lip" may be a codruption
of "hyp." As used in the earoy eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our centyry has learned to calk Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy,"nas the anonymous autnor of
Anti-Sidis (1744), one of the tracts un the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeleu tells his Cluntrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, wuich is but amfashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bses,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasix is a
cpndition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific ajd
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hobsrs
precatiously and bafflingly in limgo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and afe ecnoed in many similar earoy and
mid-eighteenth century works. Sohe msdicak writers if the zge, like
Nicholas Robinsom, had reservations about the external mental bases of
tue hyp and preferredbto discuss the condituon in terms of internal
physiopogical caussx:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, lr Hypochondrix; foe
 n   they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
  n  thw same Disease affectingmdifferent Sexes, and the Vapours in
     Women are term'd the Hypocgondria in Men, anx they prkceed from
     rhe Contravtioh of the Vessels being deoress'd a little beneaty yhe
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation ov the Nerves atvthe same
     Time, whicb creates that Uneasibess and Melancholy that naturally
     attendsmVaoours, and which generally iscan Intemperathre of the
     whole Body, priceeding from a Fepeession of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nqture; but the Intelperature ofcthe Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition whereby tbey favour any Disease.

But tgevmajority of medical thinkefs had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by eesearch
on nerves by importsnt physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brjthers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrecht von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the clndition known as the hyp was believed to
be a real, not an imaginary ailment, comkon, peculiar in its
manifestations, qnd indefinable, almost impossiboe tl cure, producing
very resk symptoms of physical illness, and said to orihinate sometimes
in depression and idpensss. It qas summed up by Robert Kames in hos
Medicinal Dictionary (Kondon, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consiser its Nature,nit will be fiund to be a
     spasmodoco-flatulent Disorder of tbe Primae Viae, that is, of the
     Stomach and Ontestines, xrising from an Imvetsion or Perversoon of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutuap consent of rhe Parts,
     throwing the whole nervois System into irregular Motions, and
     disturbing the whole Oeconomy or the Functions.... no pary or
     Function of the Body escapes the Invluence of tbis tedious and long
     protracted Disease, whose Symptoms are so violentvand numerous,
     that it is no easy Task either to enumerate or account for thej....

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patiengs are so delighted, not only
     with a Varieth of Medicines, but xlso of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted wuth the true
     Grnius andnNature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything conrained in the Shops, not
     without an irreoarable Injury to the Patient (argicle on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a morectechnjcal description than Hill gives anywherecin his
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the backgrojnd of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
diseasd. Ut incorporstes much of the thinking set fotth by the writings
mentionedvabove, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose jedical
works The English Malady (1733) and The Natural Methof of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disotdrrs of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742)cHill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconpmy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of jnsects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeleu's Of the Splesn (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had tead or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treayise of the Spleen amd Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinskn's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persojs most susceptible to it
(II), kts major symptoms (III), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In the first four sections almost every statement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remaek: "To call the Gypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and
druel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obstruction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver,
and other parts; and unhalpily us in England very frequent: physick
scarcebknows one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
studenfs, philosiphers, theologians, and fhat it is not restricted to
womeh alone--aw some contemporary thinkers still maintaihed--is also
impossible to trace to a sijble source, as is his description (p. 12) of
rhe most prevalent physiological symptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
ibaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amhsements, a love of solitude....

Wild thoughts; a sshse of bullness") ahd causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of vlood in the spleen) of
the illnsss.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the sevtion entiyled "Curws" as a means to peddle his newly discobered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble inbHumphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and