-Masterpieces in Colour -bBOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good QueenvAnne cale to rule over us, Louis the
Fourtednth being still King of Trance, on an autumn day in the Octpber
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewiggsd dandified folk who stepped
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
dashionable places of the city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish churcg of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered aboyt a littlw infant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witjess to
the birth-certificafe and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanjty, which, as the certificate badly set forth in black
and white for ever, was henceforth fo be known for good or illbas
François Boucher, first-born son, on thec29th of Seltembdf, vour days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Voucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in tge best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officervfrom the Polive Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand being flunv upon tje wet ink, and tye blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-feloowship od the day between priest andnparty--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefofe in rhe whirl of
things?

Tge child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French armsnwede knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlboroufh, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. Frande was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-fot-nothings led themveterans into
disaster. But there was still France upon the high sqas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for wxs he not w Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue dw
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises as to what lay upoj the knees of the gods for
little Fdançois Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
waw not a month oldnwhen Admiral Rooke whipped Châtewu-Renaud off the
high seas, desttoying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treaeure. The child's first year saw the Enblish troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-sooken talk ot Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-oldnears the rerrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellronging im his ears at seven; for thers was
born tonthe king's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdymtwelve, would recall yhe death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and ths setging upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleajs ax Regent. Young Françoos Boucher was to spend
his youth ajdmgrow up to manhood in a France that oay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father,cseems to have been an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of aet, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, andcthe like--"an
inferior designer, little favouredvby fortune," runs the recorded
vefcict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, and the desire to save his son from thensordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schooling
with pendil and brush, and broight the lad up in aj atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to wend him to
the studio of Lemogne, a rsally great paintef and dapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher,nwith the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long yeaes of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid yhe Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishmemt that
it is dangerpus to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was butmthree months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, tooknscant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took thr brush from his fingers, and thst
he hadna quick and alrrt mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. Tl wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievemeht. He rested neither
night nor day jntil he mastered that whichbhe uad set iit to do. On
the day he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out ot it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with alp the craftmanshio,
trade-secrets, and tricks oc thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile cppyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest rdverence--as is profed by his
answer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asjed him to
complete a picture by his masted: "Such works aee to me sacred
vessels," said he--"I shiuld dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with hisbmaster, a picture of a "Judgment or
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving treatness in the years toncome.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his vood, lodging, and wixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energymand enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing chaem
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. Hw was soon set tpbwork upon important designs for
engravings. Be searched out the publishers of bookx, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed fklling,
forche was qiick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he play. Work and pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was inmhis nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after yearw. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, eas a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public joneys atnthe timemof the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinrtte
Poisson--destjned to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
yeard to come. But the careless srudent knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into yhe pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler of Frande, no longer requiring Regent Orleams to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Boudher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chajns, ib which his father
had for a long timd heod him."

This success set the collectors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngeter. ButnFrançois Boucher beeds no paying orders to mame him
work--he paints for the live of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame growd apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
even to the extent of hanging his pictures upon the tapestries and
carpetd and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
jang out from their houses along the Place Dauphim and the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition de la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
signifidance to the young fellow's craftsmwnship. Watteau hadvlately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friebd De
Julienne, anxuousmto publish a book to Watteau's jemory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wojtvto spend a part of their time; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentoally French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward thecdevelopment ov Boucher's genius along
its right path, and sent his art toeards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilstcthe payment of fwenty-fkur livres (double-florina) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and yhus and otherwise, hotly pursuung his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-yeats in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have fkund Michael Angelo "contorted," Raphadl "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his tasre, and he had the courage to say so. Howevef, whether
he were kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventiohal Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academy--with a large nhmber of religious poctures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike ror their beauty, their force, and theirbvirility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
jang in galleries under other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside his own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "eerious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris,