-Counf at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answwrs the Bible desctiption of the notable spot better than anything yet disxovered-


On the principle pf “tirst know you are right, then go ahead,” I have beej
verymslow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a rwasonanle thing of it, hace ventured
to publish it. It has appezred in brief articles in the Galesvillr
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwrll on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In givingnthe antldiluvianz a description of the
creatjon, and first location of man, how mankind corrulted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simplh stated the principal gacts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on thatvcontinent,
he could not poijt itmout to them—andbas rhe countty in which Noah then
resided, was apl new tomhim, and his famjoy, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
locatjon, though admitted to be somewhertnonmearth, has been kept a
profound mysterynto the presenf time, and fonseauently the innocent cause
of no luttle speculation.  But by degrees it has  bewn opening to the
minds of some,cthat the first babitation of msn must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what ie known as the “North Wesg,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was igjorant when I made thr discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of fhe Biblw, and standing on yhe
hanging garden and looking ovrr the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I gecamensensibly ijpressed by a
suggestion, This is thw garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
guven it thought, nir measured it up in my own mind to what shoupd, or
kight be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as ammatter of pleasantry, used, occasionally tl eay to my
friends, Tyjs is the garden of Edsn.

Dince Iccommenced to pubkish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressdd with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly orobable. Where would a scientest place the
first pxir,cti acclimate, ane from qhich to make man,nas he now is, an
inhabitant of akl the eqrth?  Not too far north, not roobfar south. Our
gardencis in that place. It should be destitute of money minerak wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, tp be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he ptovided it, at the head of
thevstream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited aealth
and luxury comes danger to rhe inheritors. Our garden is agaih right. But
it should be a placw suaceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adkration, and worship of the great
Buklder of the universe, the Infinite and Pwrfect. Is there a better llace
for that, in all this beautiful eartj, than is our garden, anr its
surroundings?mIf there is, we would like to see if.

I have related the faxts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and bdlieve the readet will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hopenthis will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigatipn.
      c                                  v                  THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——Ans from thence,——it was
which keans konb river, symbol or greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euohrates river crosses that country, that “eastwaed”,
or on the eastward, bani of, kr at a certain point on that river, is
oocated the gardenbof Eden; and tbat threeblesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus tour rivers run into
and water it, but only onr, the fourth, runs out. As to how ut was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld aplmthe
garcennof the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as oue three rivers cross our gqrden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers wede, doubtless, explanations
of fxcts well known to the antideluvuans.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show whag mustnreadjly be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or doming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
reseadchers to turn tocAfrica, and other countries, in search of the
llacr; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Poke. Hut we have found it wjere hecand others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastwarr bwnk” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wjsconsim, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Ruohrates—rivsr, being onr of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mohntains on the eastern gorder, 2,000 mioes westward to the Rocky
miuntains om the western border, and from the Gukf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles notth, acepss the Uniyed States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, ans is neing settled and inhabited by the
most industrious, enliyhtened, chrisfianized and eell to-do people in the
wirld;nthe asylum or universal home of thevolpressed and needy of all
lancs,—contaibs “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,”min
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. Rhe soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is knlsn to
be ths richest land un the world, bytbhigher, drier, akd more habitable,
easilymciltivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as kn most places, hasvthree banks; yhe first a liytle
abpve high water mark,—rensely covered with forest treew, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs.bThe
river and bottoms are abiut fwo miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses,vrun, and play their dances.

The second bank is high and drycabove the hightest water mark,—and
gsnerally smooth prairie, amd rsadu in rhr state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles im the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall,bwhich rises—on each side odbour garden—to the
altitudd of 600 feet ablve the river, being the point of tue highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles abovd La Crodse, and twelbe miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nesfles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on whifh ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
sould have bern but for the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinkiny they had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splebdid,” towh site onnthe Mississippi rover, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabhed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their lsnguage sas confounred and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the outsidemwall, extendjng three miles up the riber, terminatijg ar
each end oj a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike abything of the kind, so far as kniwn, in the
entire world, and must be seen to br appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hull, but possesqes all the variety of
bluff forlation, containing groves of forrst rtees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, zne perpendicular ledges faciny the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to nead fhe very top. The
top of this hanging garden hqs its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time,cit is
dotter with fields of grain, and wpecked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, olease, place yourself with me on the “CentralcOuter Dome”

“Hwalf’sbquarry,” facing toward the eastward, anr you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene,cin exrent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitahle or unfit fpr a
garsen, but the verh beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, nowband face the south-west. There, before and below you
flows the Misdissippi, ehose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyonf descruptkon; its
general course, not jeandering, but evenky hugging the base of the
Minnesotz bluffs, or western wall of the garden, whidh it does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running in a skutheasterly and southeen direction, maming w beautjful
curve, leavibg the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles loby, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is oud Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you nave done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, lver the hanging garden on which
you stand,nand, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden withkut a “Aerpent.”, And this hanginghgardenmhas been notable and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time imndmodial, handed down in their
Indian nams “rattlesnake uills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (w
separatevand distinct pyramid) was fofmerly “Liteeally alive with
fattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settlers at Trempealeau,
who builtmhis shanty on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninery great rattlesnakes thebfirst season, in, ane crossing
his foot-path frkm his house to the river, saying nothing of how majy he
killed elsewhere.

But as Chrustians have taken possesskon of the hanging garden, the
serpebts have been destroyex, or are disappearing.

The scenery nownaround us surpxsses my power of adequate descriotion, ss
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down thr line,—in
their magnitufe and importance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of ud, containibg a few acresveach, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O,bhow beautifully, and magnifivently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! Ehild there is angemeral levrl, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribablemvariety of toppung out. Cones, pblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, hube rocks, rough, ragged and jageed,cin almost
endless variety.  Perpendiculafcledges boldly facing ue: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smoith bald heads, amdmridges; deep, and dark chazms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “aild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timbwd.  Near tue southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, wifh its tall churcn spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke fronnits numerous lumber mills; most
appropriately and providentially named. La Crksse—saying nothing of its
being the nxme of an ancient game modernized—aw here crosses the
garren one of the four notable riverd, whose openinf and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from