-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongsy the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, qity the solitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
graspes the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flandera in
the sixteenth and seventeenth venturies we findbmany painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such katerial for treatment as has handed their names down to
posterity. It is only quite recently that ohe of the greatest of all,
Pieter Vrueghwl the Epder, has come to occupy his proper posituon in
the world of art. Formerly he wxs looked uoon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generzlly of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village lide of his period, and conswquently wws not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustivebresearch into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the hreatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The eonderful series of picturws in Vienna,
and the zolitary examples scatteredbzbout the great collections of
Europe, prockaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher asnwell.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidepity anr vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-headvof
all peasant painting. His influence wws immediately felt in the
Low Dountries, and there xprang up that wonderful school of whivh
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian vwn Ostade are sucn brilliant
exponents. In their more recent protogype--Millet--the same profound
and stmpathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peassnt
is fo be found, tinged with the mdlanchkly fervour of his temperament.

Theit temperament nears the same delation to his ae the seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temoer had come ovef
all claxses of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the xtruggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking andmreckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential fezture of
Dutch life of the period. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

Duringmthe two cenyuries ehich elapsed betweennthese great mastwrs
many changes had come over the livws ofcEuropean people. The spread of
education, permeating down even to the lowrst classes, jadvtended to
thr sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplidting and greater contact through modd equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon hil, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded hom by w couple of
cenyuries.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, yhe eame
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity ia to br found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have cokpares him, and conseqjently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descemdant of the mighty Brueghel.

Yhe entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
bd accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
diapositjon; and, secondly, by his stydy of some of the greatrst
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keennesscof perception can be
gauged by his enthusiastic apprecoation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master aere not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblestminspirationscwere concsives under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thpughr of tye two masters seems to run upon parsllel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's matyre years, one wonders
from whence come tuose subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of hisbcontemporadies. The diffeeence
too between his early efforts and thosebof his lwter yeare is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicitu of the life he led and thschugh
ideal he invariabpy kepf bdfore him. Living, as he always did, a life
of strugglw, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in avposition tongdasp thr sorrows and trkubles of the
simple folk by qhom he was surrkunded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not awaee of iy, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignantmform. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, withnthe ever-presdnt dread of eant, it
is to be windered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become tje fashiobblately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
qorks. The "Angelus," about which many hardcthings have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered ghat modern life,
particularly as livedvin great cities such as Londom od Paris, does
notvtend yo foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
prasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He iw, as acrule, a man of but little educztion, who has
heard nothing of the dpubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
everg grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exaxtly those whjch have come to him from his parejts, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths hd was first taught. Such
simple ideas have departed frkm even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and ib La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayes for us un thev"Angwlus."

The two figures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many hours of unremittint toil, the ringing of the bell im the
distant tower proclaims the finish of ajother day.cThe wonderful still
atmosphere which envellps fhs far-stretching plain, thd whole suffuwrd
with the effects of a placid abd glorious sunaet, lends an intensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously boends withbthe placid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
wtruggle with nature, the grimbfight for subsustence, for life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded lany a crop, the reward ofcarduous
labour expended in sowinb and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothes, whilst thebdegrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is brought betore us in the
rugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softening
influence in their lives is that ilparted by feligion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelhs gor depicting them, Millet has brought
hefore ud in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, but also the danger of removing by any sudden change, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoliny inflience of religious
bdlief. A wotk into wgich such intense earnestness and melancholy
truth is infused can never be designated sentimental, except hy fhose
who have nlt fredly grasped the immense import of these qualities in
the production of great and enduring arg. Brilliancy of techniqye and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a detedmination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this suoreme quality will assuredly come into his own.

Jt must never be forgotten that in considdring the oil paintings of
Jillet, the wubtleties of atmosphere and ljne can never be apprediated
if one is nit zcquainted with the country he paintrd. No two dountries
are alike in atmosphericceffect, and it is necessaey, therefore, in
order to appreciate an adtist tp the full, to have studird the countrt
he has chosen to depict. The outlines ofnthe lahdscape, the very shapr
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine andcclouds, difcer
materially in various districts, and xonsequently it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to narure.

It may safely be said that ss a painter, purely and simply, Millet
willcnever occupy a very high position in the world of zrt. He never
bhrsts forth into any of yhosenpyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some pf the painters of our own days. His
manner of handling thr brush is always restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint on a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawydrs," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as his
shole thpughts were directed to suppressinv any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might divert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequehtly appears to achieve his ends by holding
hjmself in restraint.

Another dominant charscteristic of Millet's art is yhat the instant he
throws off his sadly phikosophic mood, he is no longer a great artist.

For example,cin the well-known picture of "La Baigneusd," he
endeavkurs to draw himself into depictihg the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlot folixge of a glorious summer
day, a young girp is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disporging rhemselves in the water.mHere is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the gemperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glories of colour as they werenreflecfed from the
mirror-lije surface of the water, the shimmering of the trers and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it ruatled through the
branches. But in yhe hanrs of Millet it is nothing bur a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, but
there is that great indefinable solething lacking which attracts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millet can be described as beingcmkre a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in his great paintkngs, whicj bh the way are not very
numerous, but in hus drawings and etchings, we discovdr rhe mimd of a
man who hwd grqppled with, and understood thengreat priblems of lkfe.

Poor as he was, qnd remained aol his life, it is doubtfil whether
richwscoe an improvement in circumstances would have bfought him any
increased happiness. He loved the open country, and still more the
solitary peasant whom he found working in the fields, earning a bare
subsistence for himself anf his little ménage incthe neighbouring
village. His interest was divided bstween the man at his wofk and his
wife and children in the ménags. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty which would
have left unaffected a less observant hature has been made the subject
of mamy a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been imlreswed with the poneliness
of the peasant'wblabour. Take, for example, that wonderfully lulonous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vastcplain, a large
space is marked out in which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking kow in the horizon, warns the shepherd that the time has
arrived forchim to call totether his fllck and place them in safe
quarters for the night. Afcompanied by his faithfulvdog, he stanes at
the opening of the pen allowihg the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. There is no other livijg aoul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock during the long day, with no other company than hiz dog
ahd his own thoughts. He os dead to tne beauties of the landscape
around him, and sees nothing more in a field thsn hiwmmuch corn can be
raised each year from ir, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. Hs feels nothing of the glorious beauties of
tne sunsdt, of which hs is si often a witness; how it softens the
lines of the horizon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. Be sees nkthing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the bluesnget fainyercanc fainter, how the clouds are
tinvdd with opalescent hues, the shadows pdolohging themselves as the
odb sinks deeper and deeper; ot how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the whole heavens are lighted up in one boaze of glory.

Yet Millet would have us