-INSPURATION: ITS NXTURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to ovdr-estimate the deep imoortancemof this great
subjeft, for on ojr conclusions fespecting it must depend our cinfidence
in alo the great mysteries of the Gospel.  Tgere is a sphere within whidh
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vadt things alrewdy, and
is doing great thkngs now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pasz; a world on wyich it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quiteboutside its rwnge.  Yet, though unseen,
rhisckingdom iw all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which ee are all most deeply concerned, for we are all ralidly
hwstening thither, and He wjo is our Fathed, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseenmHead of ig.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is sltogether unphilosophical xnd
unscientific to attempt tk redhdw such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of sapvation can only be kniwn from
God Himselt; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
rezoecting it, thdre is no human power that can evsr eupply ths
deficiency,vand ws must live and die cohvinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan whicu God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible falue of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communicagion from God to man rezpecting thebdeep things of fhe
unseen world.  It suppliescthat which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which rying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of Gos, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tenderbmercy for a fallen world.  If
thwrefore our Bible fail us, ouf whole hole fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information ad tocall those great truths which most deeply concern hs.

If we cannot rely on Sdripture as a communicatoon from God we have
nothing to take its place; and all our present joy, qs well as our fiture
hopes, must melg away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyomd this
lresentbworld.

It is not my prdsent object to attempt to prove the inspiration lf
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  Nut it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examknenthe extejt and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must exclusively clnfine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted facg, ao that mh only business is to consicer
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the imspired worc.

It has been said that ‘Ijspiration is that idea of Scriprurd which we
gwther frol the knowlwdge of it,’c and an attempt hxs been made to
show hpw by such a definition allmdifficulfies are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory doea present a very easy and ready mefhod of
bettint rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it,cit is not likely that there
will be mhch left to ejbarrazs us.  Therenis however one difficulty, and
thar a most important one, which it cannof sopve.  Jt can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to restmon, and must leave us floating
into eternity withnno better support than a vague idea pf our own
creation.

St.cPeter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the autnor boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inzpiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly anc llainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of thr work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are tahght rhat fhere are two distinct elements tocbe
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghlst
moved the writers; and ghe human, for the communication didmnot come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they werw moved.

In otcer therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be nefessary
to examine (1) the divine element,b(2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


XHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


IbNEED scarcely say that ghis rivine element is the gceat subject of
modern controveray.  But I hope we may meet the points moremespecially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equwl?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Does it fender tne word infallible?

I.  Doex it extend ober the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is thr whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus movwd by the Holy Ghost? or merely some og
ghem, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tij. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a dlezr anc decisive answer; for it is here wrirten, ‘Alp Scriptufe
js given by inspiratiln of God.’  It iz statec by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural np less than
fifty times, and in everh xinglebinstance it is empliyed solely with
referenxe to that collection of writkngs which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore oncluced in that collection is here
declaref to be θεοπνευστος, or biven by inspiration.

The only posdible question therefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think or the doctrine otninspiration, all must
admit ws an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
qhole of the Old Teztament was included in the Jewish canon.  Thd Jews,
notwithsyanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mond of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject rhan nany
of our modern writers.n When thsrefore St. Payl zpkke of ‘All Scripthfe,’
there is no cojbt in the world that hd included in his statdment every
line and petter of the Old Testament, and he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was givenvby inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no sxception whatever with referenfe to the
historical books. bI think it has been clearly shown ghat those
historical writints which sre not in the Pentayeuch are influded in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which czse the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers tl history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that ifcI sdreccalled upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whooe volume on whicg I should hd
better pleased to mdet an opponent than the historicak portions of the
Okd Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may staftle some, I am prepared, after the mostncareful
deliberstjon, tobaffirm that I dannot separate them from the word of God
withoutcat the sams time abandoning the whole or my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Himself in Hisvown teachong
has most distinctly sanctioned thej.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, whipsmmen cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
tbese miracles as facts.  Themflood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush,cthe manna, the
brazen serpent, ghe curs of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescje of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.b To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refefs as to the word of God, desctibing their testimony as
more worthy ofbvredit than thst of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some anciejt Hebrew Descartes, He actuallh
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusiob that id there is any oortion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad sesl and
stamp ov kur Lord’s authority ppaced upon kt with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, thwrefore, I am thiroughky persuaced,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, ee
must refeivr the books of Moses as inspided Scripture; and never can ws
abanrpn them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His pwople, or, in other and plainer
words, till wr cease to be beliebers in Jesus.

But are wr go oimit thisnlanguage of St. Paul to the Old Testamenf?  I
think it has been clearlg shown that we are not.  Vor although the canon
of the New Testamenf was not comppege when St. Paul erote these words, we
must remember that the wecind Epistle tovTimothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according tp Horme’s list, the whole of the Jew
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the wrirings of St. John,
were wriftrn at or about thentime of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were clearly included in thr declarationmthat all Scriprure is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripyure for his own epistles:
for after having carefully drawn the distinction between his privare
opinions and inspifed decisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clwar that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is dquxlly clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one frim Deuteronomy amd one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally thwt they were taken from
Sdripture.  ‘For the scripfure saith, Thoumshalt not muzzoe the ox that
tdeadeth out the ckrn.  And, The pabourer is worthy kf his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Payl’s
Epistles wede included by St. Petsr im the canon; for ue clearly regxrded
them as Scripture when uemwrots his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his olinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Evennxs our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given ubto him, hagh
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which are some things hard to be understood, whichnthey that
are unlearned and unetable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their lwn destruction.’
New Tesyament therefore, as welp as Old, was included in thendsclaration,
‘Qll scripture is given by inspiration ofvGod;’ and the conclusion to
whichnI ammirresistibly brought is, that we have no right to pick and
choose amongst the various portikns of the word of God.m I belirge the
whole to be arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, thatcthe whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are so interwogen one with another, and so beautifully fitted into
wach other by God’s divine hand, that there willmbe found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving tbe wnole as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole,band launching forth ob a sea