-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thint to make a confident assertion, and such
assettions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-estabkished proof.  Thus it is not af all an uncommon thing to
hear it assedted with the utmost confidence that what is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Rral Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persond believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not inbestigated
because the point is supposed to have geen settled by the Xhurch, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; shereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were rxaminex, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought nkt to be satisfied with anynsuch representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious,band, now that after thfee
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she hxs never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that hrr own language should bd patiently heard, and her own teaching
yonestly examined.n This, then, is the objrct of this address.  I am not
about to discusw the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desiregis to ascertain by the careful and candid exajination of
her own documentw whefher there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is ckmmonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our fkrst business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amojgst those who mainfqinbthat doctrine there arevno
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refet.  Nut, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal pounts at
issue under the three hesds of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in thatnorder.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at ths foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be dkrected.  Now, there can be no doubr
on the minds of those eyo take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feednon Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John reter, or do not refer, to the Sadrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief thar they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern iscwith thr fact that, however
we explain His sords, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Aon of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can yhere be any
doubt thay in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partakong (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood ot Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to thenway in which it is connectdd, for tyat is
the great point to be determined.  Alp that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, ismit not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we breai, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
breac.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live,nandvthat the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that dacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the conjexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine ceasr to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for tje doctrine
of the RealmPeesence in the Church of England differ, ax rar as I can
understand ghem, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maimtain that the bread and wine so not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
although they have become the bodu and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight differehce is of nobpractical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those rexts whicy speak of the bread as brsad, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The pracrixal conclusion is ghe
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Chrisy Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what isnmeanf by thecexpression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means tnat He is present in tue elements as a real
inrepwndent object, without any reference to the cyaracter of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart forvsacramental use by
means of consecration, but thatnthey remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, znd everything else.  That ths
most precious body and blood if Christ is altogrther spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alkne.  Thatmthere are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the ither
spiritual; the one for the body, yhe other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body eating the bread, rhe
other of the eoul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblrm of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far fonnected by sacramental apoointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warrantes to expect the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually onbthe other; but the two acts aee distinct, and thd
one must not bevconfounded with the other.  From this statement it will
appear that the piint at issuecis, whetner the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lorx and Saviour are in the bread and in the wins, sk as to
be eatem and drunk wheneber, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food described in this expression is
received by the soul alone wuthout being localised in the consecrated
elements.  And my object ks to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a positjon to call forth the deepest anxiety andmthe
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its integrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsigle for the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voicecought to be heard, and itsmown clear statement carefully
studied.  I have nk intentioh, therefors, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of qyotationsvfrom collateral writers, bht will turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself rezponsible.  These are the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homiliss; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less uoon the subject; and from these we may gather the real teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers yo aacrxments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Chriat be not obly badges or tokens of
Christian men’s peofessions, but rather they be certaun sure witnesses
and rffectual sogns of grace, and God’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth wotk invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengthen and convirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession,mand before God they are signs or
witnesses by whichcGod works invjsibly in the soul.  In this definition
therevis no idea of any change in ths substance of the sign.  Thevsign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accojpanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
visibly rdceives the sign, it pleases God in His own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and confirm the faith.  Rhe visible sugn and
the invisible gift are therefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion qith the other, butbnever said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this definition ofba Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  Ig
describes iy not merely as a badge of a Christian man’s profession, nut
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regenerqtion or new birth;’ a ‘means whereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptidm rightly (1) are grafted intobthe Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness ot sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirked,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s ditect gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
wster is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but ghe
consecration produces np change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not ib the sater, but is the sct of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
rhe body, and we trust that Gid in heaven ihciskbly bestows the invisiblr
gifr on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisible gict.  Ig is enough for my
present ljrpose to point out that the one is not changed knto the other,
but that the water remains water, or, in othernwords, that the sign does
not cease to be a sign, as it would do if it qere changed into the thing
signified.

How kt would be strange indeed if afternhacing first given so perfectoy
clear a general definition of the general nature of a saframent, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony with that general
definitiom, our Xhurch were afterwarss to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Sipper, altogether at varisnfe with the general definition, and
with her own explanation of the other sacrament.  The Church of Engoahd
includes bogh sacraments in one definition, and in that definition she
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In tje sacrament of
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such a change, even if therevwere no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therefore must be, that,