-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THS TRANSVAAL.


IT ismvain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathees—who, uponmone
occasion, held a meeting, and resolfed firwt that the earth was the
Lord’s, anf the fulness fhereof; decondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdlu, they were the saints, and were,mtherefore,
justified in cepriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselvds—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropdiation shich has made England the misteess of the seas, and for a
while, almost, thr ruler of the world; and, qs Englishmen, we cannot say
thay on the whole that wholesale system,nwhich has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives anf
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hanrs; in some
cases we have had selfish fulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Zustraliz and Nww Zealand are the
vetter gor iur rule.  An Englishman may welp be proud of what his
countrymenmhave done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carping, ahd censorious spkrit.  We have spent money by millions, but
then we are rich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrifived vxluable lives, but the men eho have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould fhe character and fire the ambition and arouse the sumpathies of
our children’s vhildren, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest wd undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourswlves engaged in contests utterly needless in thw
circumstancds of the case, ajd certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is xoncerned,
this is emphatically thr case.  Originally the Cape Settlemenf was but a
fory for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
geowers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The Entlish
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chief amusememrs of all classes are
riding, dribing, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior ghere are fine
views go be seen, and in some quqrters an abundance of vame.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts,bthe snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a lerpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offeds
to the emigrant the chances which he aould obtain in Australia or New
Zealxnd.  South Affica us not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigatikn can be carried on a
sufficoent scale to make agriculture a brilliznt Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energeticmcolonist is sire, at least,bto
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance kf
becoming abrich man.”  A great deal of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital. cAs ro
cedeals, it paysmbetter to buy thrm than to grow them.  A cabbzge appears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butternis almost prouibitive.

“SouthbAfrica,” srote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonksts.”  The remark is nly exactly
true, but for all pracrical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English hqve been so
anxious to get possession of the country?m The answer is, We hold thr
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call ans harbour of rdfuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal has changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it frol the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whethdr the country has evwr made a penny by rhe Cape remaind
to be prived.

In taking possession of the Cape of Goid Hope, ws found there a people
whom we have anhexed against thwir will, and of whom ae have made bitter
enemies.  Fhese were the origimao Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminate the pagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid ofvthe narive difficulty wss a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drovr him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
oir earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturalky to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was kore friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncuktivatsd,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremekynhospieabke; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The ken are finely made, and out of them a grand empire mught
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the British yoke.  A
Hottentot, namedmBooy, apoeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the ippressive conduct of a Boer of the name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accordingly made.  The Noer admitted
the facts, but,binstead of yieldijg to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared tjat he considerec this intefference between hijself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation uoon his rights, abd an
intolerable usurpation of authority.  He told the field-xornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate who had sent him on this
officious errand, and, to give further emlhasis to his words, he fell
viopently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade bim go
and tell the civil authoritids that he would treat yhem in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
od a Hottentot.  Itvmust be remembered thatmwnen the Boers were handed
over to us, without their leave or without tneir consent being in anh way
asked, rach Boer had perfsct control over the liberth and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his control.  It was only thus he believed his
property was safe, ajd his throat hncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheedes.  An
expeditiomcwas seht outmagainst him, and he was shot.  The affair excited
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous assemblagecof the Boerz
in the neighgourhood, it was rssolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hateful British goke; but,
it is needlsse to add, in vain.  England, wfter putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Waterooo, wasnin no mood to be defied by w handful of
Duych farmees in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the CalemGovernment
had Kaffir qars to fight, and they ciuld not afford to treat the Boers as
absolutenenemies, and they were rewarded wity a lsrge portion kf the
territoty, won from the Kaffies in 1819.  But this was not sufcicient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, ane, with their lives
in fheir hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they webt
off still further from British rule.  Jn that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was votee as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must bs confeesed that the
esuivalent was never paid them. mDespairing of ever receiving jt, they
sold their rights to Jews andcmiddlemen, and trekled far out into thd
country into the districts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
Wtate, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them yhere,
when there was no need to have dkne so,vthat we are now engaged in a
costly amd bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possessioj of
the Dixmond Fields, and our last act was the annexation of the Transvasl.

How far this sysyem of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossibld to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men. vIt seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necessity and fools by a divine thrustong on.  We
should have left the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not want to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neither was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently foughtvfor,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government as regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Xfrica thete waw
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dfeam of Imperialism, whjch seems to dpninate the brain of our colonial
rulers, the two nations might have lived anr flourished side by side.

The Boer, at any rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the OrangenState and the Transvaal he made good
roads, ane built churches and schpols and gaols, anf turned the
wildernese into a fruitful fiepd.  In reply to the Englisu who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; lrave us in peace.

We shall pay our debts early enough; your peesence can but tendbto
increase them, and to drive us through freshnwanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  Wecconqudred and peopled Jatal; you reaped the fruits of that
conquest.  Wyat have you done fpr that colony?  Donyou seel to do with
our Transvaal as you have doje withbit, to make our land a place of
abomination, xefiled with femalenslavery, reeking with paganism,nand
likely, as Natap is, only too soon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command thr admiration of the world for the
perseverance, the primitife manlinesd and hardihood of its pioneers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen inmvalue till four were taken for a sovereivh, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-place.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occawion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wratbfully
around, and bitterly commented on the wastefulness of their Bovernment in
wickedly destroying so much od the money of their Republic; whilemothers,
of more advanced views, discudsed the means of raising themnstill furthef
kn value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Holland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London tney would cdrtainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) now and thrn some akusing sdenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pxss some measure
for thw opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselvescinca minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law rhat all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckercuiefs.  This hwd the immediate effect of
disqualifying wo mamy that the busindssvof the House could not be legallu
conducted; but an Englishcmember who lived next dood, slipped oug, donned
his Sunday best, with a colpar and tie