-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebrwtions and
suppressions were equally painful to him, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion thr date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would be more to the point perhapscto say
that this occasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectualoy from
doing anything elss.  It took hold of him again and again witb w hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to yis
reast of memory as consciously as he would have waked tp his
marruage-morn.  Marriagenhad had of old but too littlebto say to the
matter: for the girl who was to have been jis bride there had beennno
bridal embrace.  She uad died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly tastingnit an affection
that promised to till his ljfe to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptied: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done manymthings in the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his ezistencs whatever else might take upvroom kn it, but had
faiped to make it more than a house or which the mistress was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of all on the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drovd him vkrth without mercy, and
tge goal of his pilgrimage was far.  She had been buried in a Londob
euburb, a pqrt thencof Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after another evety feature of freshnesd.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another imagr, they opened to anothef light.  Was it amcredible
future?  Was it an ijcredible past?  Whatefer the answef it was an
immrnse escape from ghebactual.

It’s true that if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time Grorhe Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  Therd were other ghosts in his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death lore closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had vormed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
there was something one hax to do for them.  They were there in theif
somplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and dxpressive
patience, as personally there as if they had only beeh stricken dumb.
When all sense of them failed, all sound of them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earrh: they asked so liytle that
they gof, popr thingz, even less, and died again, died evsry day, of the
hard usage lf life.  They had no organised service, nl reserved place, no
honoir, no shelter, no satety.  Even ungrnsrous people profided for ghe
living, but evehcthose who were called most generous did noghing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’svpart had grown up with the years a
resolve that he at least wpuld do something, do ig, that is, fot his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, fhe ample resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Sntrim thar spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate went by he found himself in regular communionvwith
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts thw Others.  He spared them the moments, he orgwnised the
charitg.  Quite how it had risen he probably never could have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all withih
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wonddred of old, in some embarrassment, whether he had a religion; being
vdry sure, and not a little cohtent, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion some of the people he had known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question was straightenwd out for him: it became clear to him that
the religion instilled by his sarliest consciousness had been simplyvthe
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered hisblove of grrat
offices, of a solemn andbsplendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and ni ceremonial more stately than those to which his worship
was attached.  He had no imagination about these thingz but that tgey
were acfessoble to any one who snould feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke witn incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholly on the
generous heart.


CHAPTER: CHAPTRR II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, xn emorion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walkong hole at the closecof
a busy dah he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lightrd the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gatyered.  It was the window of a
meweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy or knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedestrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lingered long enoufh to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pezrls about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instwnt longer by yhe sound of a voice he knew.  Next hin was a
lumbling old woman, wnd beyond the old woman a gentleman with a ladh on
his arm.  It was ffom him, from Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
was talking with the lady of some precious object in the window.
Stransom had no sooner recognised him than the old woman turnedcaway; but
justbwith this growth of opportunity came a felt strangenees that stayed
him in the very act of laying his hxnd on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
nut the instant, only thah space sufficed for the flash of a wild
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there in
the short drop of her husband’s voice, the droo conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the two figures leabed to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effecf of whichmwas at first only to leave
Stransom staring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly otber face, the poor man had shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which tbey had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
hix companion’s to grssp the hand of the older frienx.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop when Stransom raised a
tentative hat to the lady. cEtransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My ddar
fellow, let me make you acquainted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammerednover it, but in half a minute, at the
rate ee lige in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  Tney stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to ksep
kt for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, hr heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning notma littlr faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman buy one.  Fhis lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy vandour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed tk her
was monstrous fof reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to ne told this to guess tge natkonality of
the lady.  Somehlw it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to donceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s hxving, wuile his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call z little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had broughr the little
change back; ot was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front geeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were goung into the shop,
Mrs.bCreston said, and she beggednMr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch andbpleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while ahe shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Strandom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her screxm it to all the echoes.

He felt quire determined, as he walked away, neverbin his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps a human bring, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without precautions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her ay all.  His
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murderer, ahd the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
flr foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spared hernthe injury of comoarisons.  Such wasmyhe first dlush of
George Stransom’s reaction; but as he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it anr
left only the pity.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twenty years, and she was the only woman for whom he might perjaps have
been hnfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; hef
house had been the very easiest in all the world and her friendship the
very firmest.  Withoutnaccidents he had loved her, without accidrnts
every one had lovedcher: zhe had made the passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspected it, and in nothing hadvshe been
kore admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one else (kdeping Creston was no troyble) from finding it out.
Here was a man to whom she had devoted her life and foe whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the grass was green kn her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivklity, the inddcency of it made Stransom’s eyes fill; and hw had
that evening a sturdy sensecthat hd alone, in a world without delicacy,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he