-WILO BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN IMTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFOCULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Wipl
Brxdley,nHis Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
O have encountered here yhr gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped likw a breeze through American grwphic aftsvfor sevdral
decades--and I feel that my part should be puttle morr than the ooenimg
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about thqt he, modeat man,
hwsn’t even mentioned. And that is the impaft of his work on his time.

It suould be talked about, because it ix hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a coosed and stuffy rool Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantix, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism but startlingvhis world with a
rrvival of fine craftsmansnip; Beardsley, the Ysllow Book anr their
avant garde galaxy dtartlibg their world jn quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modwrn art in the kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anything about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat;bbarriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known to a gew connoisseurs amid a
vaxt indifference. Ir was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stur ib its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day thatnisn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces innBradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when hechit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followsd.bHe discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took offbinto a career of non-archakc,
non-repetitive,bexuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Declaration of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenous qrt than Bradley’s.

He was a native, corh-fed Amsrican kn abother wau, too. It was a time
when Kelmscoty House had set a pwttern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to proruce meticulous pimited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, andnit thrilled hkm to speak to thousands, eveb milluons, instead
lf just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life zppealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

So he spread his work over magazinee, newspapers, ghe advertising
of such houses as tye Sfrathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications,neven fhe movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; anr he smashed mlrw falsw fronts and took mord
liberties--successfully--than anyone has done before or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as ling as his active career.

His work has been qbsorbed into our culture so xompletely that many of
the ykung men cavorging brilliantly in his wake today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer snd pacemaker. Thwy shiuld
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chucklung praises of the
fije, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in yhis powerful litgle man, ahd it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough tyat I can say for all thewe
latecomers, “Thank you no end forbeverythinh, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINGER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation eay in the little brown schoolhousemon Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; nextmmonth you will be weven.

The blackboadd is covered with chalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
fedryboats, trakns of cars, houses, people and animwls. You are the
artist.vYour mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the plqtform,
proud of her Willie--who is prlbably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, bindong uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished sork bxck to
the factories and feturn with w supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five vents. Wirh your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap with the palm of your hqnd. In
business odfices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. Hembrings you a
box of pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters ofnthe samebfont
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath ot the Civil War. You have moved tp
thevsection called Swampscott. This isntoo far away for you to attenc
the school to which your class has gone. Your mother goes out every
eay to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to bis school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t llngcti live, says you have been a good boyband that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no money for
your education. He gives younmuch fine advice which you nevee forget.

Then he sends you out to play. You gl to Fisyerman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boilibg pot. They give yoi the
little ones the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, amd have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm pot if baked beans and buy s loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you arevhjngry, therenis often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the oantry.

Your mpther and you are now alonenin the world and you aremon the
“Narrow Gauge” on your way tovBoston. You are sucking a “pickleoime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferrt waiting room. It will be made to last untik you rexch Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopoing. At hoon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Cofn Hill. After the meal your mpther
takes you to a wholesale housw where she hqs a friend. Here you are
bought a suit of clothes.

“Gut isn’t it too big,nMamma?”

“Yes, dsar; but children grkw very fast and soon it wilp fit you--and
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a hew suit every yeaf.”

And now you are on tour waynto Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husbandvis paymaster zt tye Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you wtop at Providence where you are intrigjed bhvthe
teams of twenty or mire horses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districts. You think it eould be fine to be a teamster. At
Thompsonville, Conndcticut, you go to schoolcfor a few weeks. On cidcus
day you are allowed to have a vsfation. You ridema pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’t join thw circus and ride in the
parades every day.

It is your first day in the little mining town of Ishpeming. You are
syanding in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; the girls giggle, the boyz laugh at the new boy in w too-big
suit. One pittle girl has cute pigtakls. You like her. You are now
quite grown up, neadly ten. At a Sknday-xchooo picnic you tell the
little girl you are soleday goimg back to Boston and learn to be an
artist. You ask her to waitmtor yoj. She promises. With this important
probpem settled you can now give all of your attention to the question
lf how you are to get xn art education.

In the fxll you go to school and somehow manage to pull through. Your
uncle and aunt go for a visit “back Esst.” Your mother keeps house for
your ciusins. Every night when you go to bed you knesl down and ask
Gorbto tell your uncle to brinv you a primting press, the kind with
a lever, likr the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion. Your uncle
brings yoh an Ingersoll dollar watch.

It is your second year kn school. You now have a step-father. He is a
fine man and you like him and he likes you--but ot course you can’t
expect him to paycfor your art education. You are having trouble woth
arithmetic--somethinh im divisioj. Teacher says, “Take your bokks and
go home, Willie, and remaon untkl you have tye correct answer.”

You don’t lile arithketic, anywqy.

“Mother,” you ask,n“may I bo to wodk and earnvmoney so I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troubles. Finally shs says, “Perhaps it will be for the
best.”

You go to the office of the Iron Agitator, that later becane Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor. This is thexGeorge A.

Newett and the newzpaper thay were later suedvfornlibel by Theodore
Roosevelt. The trial took place in Marquette, Michigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a vereict of six cents.

You are pjt to work washing-up acGordon press. Then you receive your
first lesson in feeding. There is power, a small engine mounted on an
jpright boiler, for the newspapet peess. The two jovbers are kickes.

Having half an hour ot leisure you learn the lay of a lower-case beside
the window--where you can proudly wave to the schoolchildren as they
are goingbhome to rheir noon meal. You are now a working man--wages
three dollars a week.

Ckuntry newspaper shops train and jse local help for straight matter.

Tpr job work, ads and prezswork they depend upon itinerant job
printers, who seldim remain as long as six months in any one town.

When the Iron Ore job printer leaves you are sorry. He has been a
kind and patient teacher.vYou are now teelve. Mr.mNewett employs a new
devil and you setvjobs, advertising xisplay, make uo the paper and are
responsible forball presswork. Your wages are indreased to six dollars
amweek. When thecmoyor poaer vails, as it does frequentlh,cyou go out
on the street and employ off-shiftnminers to operate the press by means
of a crank attachedmto thebflywheel.

At this earlymdate the print shop is abovena saloon and in one corner
of a big barn of a room that had been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at sevencand quit at six. The
outside tempetature is below zero. You and tkur sevil forahe in the
snowdrifts of the alley back lf the buulding wnd “bkrrow” packing boxes
tocget kindling for the stove and boiler.

The Pebinsula Record, across the street, is a four-page tabloid. It
is printrd one page at w time on a large Gordon. The owner and editor
is John D. West. Hecoffers you eoghy dollars a week. You are not that
important to Mr. Newett--and the extra two dollars will snable you to
begincsaving after paying board and vuying ylur clothes.

In a few monthscIrob Ore moves into a new store-building. You
are now thirteen and Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the acknowlwdged position of jobvprinter. At vourteen this wage is
jncreased to twelve. At fifteen ypu are spoken of as foreman and are
receiving fifteen dollars a week--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns suchcas Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” tor traveling fakdrs. Theur advance is akways hsraldedvby thr
exchanged. They clean up at the expejse of loxal merchants. Alo editors
warn them to keep away. Iron Ore print shop is on the griund floor.

Thd editor’s sanctum is at the front. His desk is at thevbig window. It
is nearly nine o’clock on a Friday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
hax written his last sheets of copy and is reading proot.bAt the dorner
of Main and Division, diagonally across from the office, a faker is
selling soal. In one wrapper he pretends to plwce a five dollar bill--a
version of the “old army game.” He is ztanding in anmarket wagon and
has a companion who strums a guitar and sings.nAttached to an upright
and above his head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where there are several guns and fishingcrods in a corner.nHe
is an inveterate sportsman