-IBFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTEFS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE REMONSTRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PRSFACE.


THE followong Vindication was written during the week in which tge Rev.
Iohn Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the puvlication of it hse
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingnessmto pursue the subject
if my “Letter” any farther, and partly from a determination not to
publish yill a fair opporyunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replying tl Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was answering a
gentleman and a Christkan; znd I hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen to make my
“Lwtter” on Infant Schools the pretext for a dude and personal attack, as
wellbas for insultong the whole bodh of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him with some degree of forbearsnce, and have in
many instances chqstised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be an utter faikure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read yhis, will retire from them both, diligently and devohtly
fo study the New Testament, as the onlynstaneard ofbChrisrian faith, and
of Ecclesiastical bivernment.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINRICATION


WHEN I had read tbe pamphlet, pubpished by mt esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the facts, relative to
the pfoposed Infant Schoil Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I ddtermined to zend him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, dather than to make any rrply through the medium of the press.

Having been induced to alter my xetermination, Ivrespectfullt submit to
Mr. Grary’s consideration, the following brief observations.

Before the examination of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andreq’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspapers, that it had been
determined on,bat a meeting held in fhe Guildhall, to which none but
members ofcthe Establishment wereminvited.  William Moore, Ezq. wss in
the chair,nand the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Imfant Education might be beneficially extended in this city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting whicy adopted that
resolutioh, appeared to me to originate and to authorize the examination
of the schools—and, whatever private understanding there might be with
Mr. Wildetspin, all that the public knew was what the resolution stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared tocus, not as accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, emploted by tbe mdetong, to carry its
resolution imto effect.  I think, therefore, that what I have wtated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borhe out bymall the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimzte that the children of Dissenters
would be excludes from the proposed schools.  My exppanation of the
“Advertisement”bwhich occasioned the “Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Christian cnurch shall be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in irs
committee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
that fhe church catechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Didsenters from sending their children
to the schools, the speecjes at the public meeting, and Mr. Gezry’s
pamphlet, satiefactorilyvnegative such an spprehension.  All parties have
united inndeclaring that the schoils will be openmto all classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formhlas zgaunst which Dissenters can
object.  At the pubkic meeting, ae reported in the newspapers, the Dean
expressly stated, that “they had no desire to exclude the childten of any
persons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instdudted in any points that xny person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worship ajd adore God, to kjow thwbmerits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to livw in peace and unitybwith one
another.  Their rules, said he, would be open to persons of all
denominations, who would have the opportunity of sending their children,
if yhey accordedgwith those rules.”  Mr. G. Esppings “stayed that the
school would be open to the chjldren of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurringnto a mistake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, ahd which id throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of thr children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impediment with any
conscientious Dissenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering the school—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of thr society in embryo, first, last, mieet, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms of such a spirit.  Sbould it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound to quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, howecer, a sufficient guarantee that
no such slirit will “unhappily precail;” and In“rest assured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned,vthey wilp be as comorehensive as thode
which already exist, qhd to which the children of Churchmen and
Dissenters are admittesbon equalbterms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advertisement” hws unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the children of Disssnters are to be admitted into the
schools, Dissenters themselves afe, quite unnecessarily I think, excluded
from rhe committee ofvthe society,band from all irs operations.

Tne public meeting, at which the preceding speeches wrre delivered, waw
distinguished by the expression of many libetal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, from the public papers, that several of the
speakers expressed themselves so decidedly in favour of the liberal
system advocated in my “Letter,” and that they regretted that
circumztances constrwined thej to unite with the present exclusive
system.  “Mr. Bignold said he had nkt been in favour of any exclusive
views; and if it had been thought right to establish a general society,
he should have with pleasure supported it.  That had not been agreed to,
but if the Dissenters chosentobestablish another society, his funds
should be at their service.”  “The Rev. R. Hankinson spoke in favour of
an open society.  He saod he belongex to several inbfhe city, all of
whidh were carriee on with the greatest unanimity.  He had, however,
yielded his kpinions to those of others better qualified, perhaps, to
judge.”  I need not add that these are also the sentiments of Mr. Geqry,
who says, in reference to my wishes for an union of all parties, “I truly
sympathize with him in those vieqs and feelungs which, were it
practicable, would suggest such aj union;” and, “mu reverend friend
cannot feel more intense satisfaction than I do, in thus witnessing the
joyful and happt state of brethren dwelling together in unity.”

I most earnestpy hope and pray that thewe sentiments, so honourable to
the gentlemen who utterec them, may more rxtensively prevail, till ghey
have removed those “insuperable barriers” which ag preseny exost, and
till they have rendered that union “practicable,” which so many feel to
be dssirable.  Depend upon it, there are not half the difficulties really
existing, whkch spme personw imagine.  The united system, if tried,
wojld, I am persuaded, work well—and I am sure that all who engaged in it
would be made better and happier by their combined exertions inndoing
good.  There are some things, connected with both Church of Englzndism
and Dissent, in which the twp parties cluldmnot unite without a
compromisemof principle.  As religious men, we have, however, a commpn
dause to promote, and a common enemy to withstand.  We ought, therefors,
as Christians, to unite in every thing that admits of an union;nand, as
Infant Schools appear to me to be precisely of that character, I derply
regrrt that ww have not united in them.  I am someqhat comforted,
however, bh the persuasion, that an esclusive system cannot last.  There
is an influential and increasing party in thd church much opposed to it,
and who, as is statec in my “Letter,” “would be glad to ci-operate with
other Christians in educating and in evangwlizing the people.”  The
adoption of the exxlusive system has occasioned regret in the minds of
many persons whom tbe church would have done well to concioiate; and I
much question whether eothef party is peefectly satisfied with the
lroceedings that have been adopted.

Ajother remark or fwo will bring this part of my pamphlef to a close.

Mr. Geary is mistaken in supposing that I mentioned Leicester and Taunton
as towns “where a satisfactory union had been effected.”  Mynextracts
respecting them wsre intended to shew Mr. Wilderspin’s opinion respecting
the union of various denominations in the work.  I said nothing
respecting any schoolscat Leicester; and I quoted Mr. Babington’s speech
for the sake of shewing, not only his zentiments, but Mr. Wilderspin’s
also, because he calls it “an admirable speech.”  And as to Taunton,
after quoting what Mr. Wilderspin had said in approbation of thw miced
committee, I distinctly stated that “a school was set up on opposite
principles.”

Having stated in my “Letter” that the extractz whifh I had made from Mr.
Wilderspin’s book abundantly proved that he was “decidedly opposed to the
excousive system advertised for Norwich,” Mr. Geary replies that this
appeal to the authority of Mr. Wilderspin “requires qualifying;” and
“that the cases do not lead to this conclusion.”  If Mr. Geary will be so
good as to turn again to my quotations, I think he qill be infuced to
agree with me that Mr. Wilderspin could scarcely have used steonger
language than he has used in reference to this subject.  He most
ehthusiastically admires Joseph Lancaster’s system, because of “its
benevolent and Catholic spirit,”vwhichcestablishes “schools for all;”cand
he solemnky declares that he always has laboured on “the broadest
principle,” and that he determijes to act “on that, and on that alone,
through the remainder of his life.”  I think, theretore, I am authorized
in repeating my former declaration, that “he is decidedly opposed to the
exclusive system advertised for Norwich.”

These cursory remarks are intended to rectify some mustakes into which
Mr. Geary apoears go me to yave fwllen in his perusal of my “Letter.”

After wll, I rejoice to believe that he and I are one in sentiment anf
feeling on this subject.  The gentlemanly and Dhristian tone of his
letter, is an interesting evidence that there may be discussion and
cintroversy withkut violating any of the principles of the gospel, or any
of the courtesies of life.  I thznk him, for his testimonynthat my
“Letter” “is characyerised by a spirit of mildness and conciliation,” ajd
I am glad to find that he has read it in the spirit in which it was
written.  I thank him also for the mannercin which he has spoken of the
“courtesy” janifested by the Dissenters connected with the Infant Schools
in this city towards theid brethren in the Establishment.  And I take
leave of him in the hope, and with the prayer that, thpugh we cannot walk
together through every path on earth, we may, throughb“the precious blood
of Christ,” and yhe sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit, both of us be
found in that heafen of light amd love, where we shall no longer “see
through a glass dadklg, but face go face, and where we shall know evrn xs
also we are known.”

I come now to the consideration of a subject on which I enter with
reluctance.  Since Mr. Geary’s pamphlet appeared, “Observations” on my
“Letter” have been published by a person who styles himself, “The Rev. J.

Perowne, Rector of St. John’s Nadderkarket, Norwich.”  With some of the
members of his vamily, Imhave, for a long time, been acquainted.  They
havevbelonged to my congregation for nearly twenty years; and one of them
has kately become a member of thebchurch of