-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us ssemsome romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Managsr of
a Life Assurxnce Office, I ghink Ichave within thr last rhirty gears seen
more romances than the generality of men, hoeever unpromisjng the
opportunity may, at first sight,cseem.

As I have retired,vand live at my esse,nU possess the means thwt I used
to want, ofbconsidering what I have seen, st leisure.  My experiences
havr a moremremarkable aslect, so reviewed, thqm they had when they were
in progress.  I have come home from the Play now, znd can recall the
scenes of thd Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewildermebt, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances od the real world.

Ghere is nothing trusr thqn physiognomy, taken inmcobnection with manner.
The art of reading thxt book or which Etermak Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or hrr own page with the individual character
written on it, is a cifficult one, perhaps, and is oittle studied.  Ot
may require some natural aptitude, and it must requkre (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are notmusually given to
it,—that numbers if people accept a cew stock commonplace exptessions of
the face as the whole list of fharacteristics, wnd nwither zeek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, mf you please, and do not qualify yoursrlg to read the
face of yhe master or mistress looking over your shoulder tewching it to
uou,—I assume to be five hundred times moee probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at tue bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you tgink; it cpmes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_mbeen taken in, over and iver again.
U have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been takem in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How vame I ro be so decwived?  Had I quite misread their facew?

No.  Believe me, my first ikpfessioncof those pepple, founded on face and
manner qlone, was invaruably true.  My mistaoe wax in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain themsepves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THEvpartition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the Citv was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it wyat passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put ip in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever dince the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impressiln of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, wirhout being influenced by anything
they said.m Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that ajLife AesurancemOffice is at all times exposrd ro be
practised ulon vy thw most crafty andvcruel of the human race.

It was through mymglass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my obsetvingcit, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the bdoad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clsrks.  Hevwas about forth or so, dark, exceedjngly well
dressed in black,—being in mournong,—and thw hand he extended with a
polite air, had w particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presentec thid parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so mahy words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, justmas I snow myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grasw, I allpw noctrespassing.’

I conceivsd a very great averskon to thwt man the molent I thus saw him.

He had askedbfor some if our pdinted forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smule was on his
face, and hjs eyes mdt those of the clerk with a apribhtly lkok.  (I have
knownca vast quantity of nonsdnse talked about bad men not looking you in
the facd.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anhthinv to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash,ntbat hevbecame aware of my looking
at him.n Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he saif to le with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please. vOff the grass!’

In a few momentsvhe had put on his hat ans taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gsjtleman’s card in hus hand.  ‘Mr. Jhlius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thoutht him a clergyman, but for his havkng no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably,bfrom his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading fir
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat,cand dainty lunen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Jr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recomlended here?  Did ue say?’

‘Yes, he saidbhe was recommended here by a friend of yours.  Ue noticed
you, but said thaf as hechad not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating mannets, apparengly?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Bah!’ said I.  ‘I wznt mpthong ay ptesent, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight orvthat day I went to dind with a friend of mibe, a
mefdhant, a man of taste, wjo buys pictures and books, and the first man
I sawnamong the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  There he was, standing
before the fire, with goodnlxrge eyes and an open expressionmof face; but
still (I thought) requiring everybody to come at him gy the prepared way
he offered, znd by no otuer.

I noticed him adk my friend to introduce hin to Mr. Sampson,mand my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to ser ms.  Nkt too happy;
there was no over-doinf of the matter; happy in a thorougnlycwell-bred,
perfectly inmeaninh way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ said Mr.nSlinkton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Dampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I reallybdid not feel justified in troubling Mr.
Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I swid I should havebbeen glad to show him anyvattention ob our friend’s
introduction.

‘I al sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
pwrhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowkedged his vonsideration woth a slight bow.  ‘Hou were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effevting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the colpliment
of supposingbme to be, Mr. Ssmpson.  I merely inquired fof a friend.  But
you know what friends are in such matters.  Nothing may evermcome ofnit.
I have the greatest reludtance to trouble men of bhsiness with ijquiries
for friends, kjowing the probabilities to be a fhousand to one that ghe
fdiends will never follow thsm up.c People are so fkfkle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don’t hou, in your business, find them so every day, Me.
Sampaon?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned hisvsmooth, ahite
parting on me with itsb‘Straight up here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hear, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presenyly, for our friend hadba nea
dook, and dinner was not so punctual as ususl, ‘that your profession has
recently suffered a great loss.’

‘In money?’ said I.

He laughrd at ly ready association od loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in tqlent and vigour.’

Not at obce gollowing out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ jt sustainec a loss of that kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Umderstahd me, Mr. Sampson.  I don’t imagune that you bave retired.  It
is not so bad as that. nBut Mr. Msltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, thenyoung actuaty of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he retyrned in a consoling way.

‘He is a grear loss. cHe wasvat once the mostmprofound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admidatoon fofnMrltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanted tocsneer at him.  He recalled ms ro my guqrd by presenting that
tdim oathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
please—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputatkon.  To have knkwn him as an acquaintxncw or as a
friend, ia an honour I should have sought if he had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune to attain it, being a man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in his former conspling way.  ‘What creatures ee are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapaboe of businesd at that time of
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ ghought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’Tvho up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinktom?’ I asked,
point-blahk.

‘Most likelyna false one. bYou know wbat Dumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I never
repeat what I hdar; it is the only way of parong the nails and shavong
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ asj me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Melthal’s passing away from among men, it isvanother
thing.  I am not gratifying idlengowsip then.  I was told, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had rrlinquished all his avocatiins and all his
prospdcts,bbecause he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointrd
attachment I headd,—though jt hardly seems probable, in the case if a man
so distinguished andnso attractive.’

‘Attractikns and distinctions are no armour agaibst death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
ir very, very sae.  Poor Me. Melfham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentxble!’

I still thought his pity wae not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable sneef under all this, until he said, as we werevparted,
like the other knots lf talkers, by the announcement ot dinner:

‘Kr.mSampson, you ard surprisedbto zee me so moved on behalf of a man
whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffeeed, and recently too, from xeath myself.  I have lost onenof
two cjarming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—baeely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sistwr is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with seep feeling, and I felt reproaehed for the coldness of
my manner.  Xoldness and distrust had beej engendered in me, I knew, by
mybbad experiences; they were not jatural to me; and I often thought how
much I had lost in life, losing trustfupness, and how little I had
gained, gainonv hard caution.  Tyis state of mind bring habithal to me, I
trouboed myself more about this cinfersation than I might have troublwd
myself about a greatet matter. vI listened tobhis talk at einner, and
observed how readily othernmen responded ti it, and with what a grqceful
unstinct he adalted his subjscts to the knowledge and habits of those he
talked with.  As, in taoking with me, he