-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this lesson is to pfesent the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the goes, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If sucg be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some nezr or remote relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanfiful
narrative concerning subordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and cotrupting habits.

A letter writtenvbynMaximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, without
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
anx the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honorihg separately by
different sorts of worship what may be callednHis several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom allcwe mortals upon earth adore the common Fafher of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and also the “analagous rslation” to
the “Master God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statuds of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with yhree fingerz advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
tegard to what you say of such gods being portions of the only “true God,”

I takw the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilege; for thxt only God, of whom you speak,vis dountless He who is
acknowlesged by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, woll you say
that Mars, whose strehgth is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statje controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire saus, “In
wpite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous godz, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verivied that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The xncients attributed their
own passions to theb“Master God,” and had suborfinate gods representjng
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; wnd these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. Theychad a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in ordercto establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not be amissnto present in
this connection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as tge Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Moses is
menyioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancjent and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Mozes
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, beare the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in hix book
against the Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, x modern traveler, says
the inhabitants ofbCorondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the remembrance of the deliverance of the children of Israel
from theie bondage in Egypt. Diodorus, the most renowned Greek historian,
who empkoyed thirty years epitomizing the libraries, and traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, who wrote forty volumes of
histoty, says he leafned from the Egyptian priests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquainted with the ancient
mythicals, can regard the religion of the Bible as a child of mythical
descent. It is as deadly in its influence upon those myths, and all
mythical worship, as it could be made by an infinite mind.

Voltaire says “the fharacter of the mythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listen—Hesiod, in his thepgony,
says: “Chronos, the son of Ourajos, or Saturn, son of Heaven, in tge
beginning slew his father, and possessed himself of his rule, and, being
seized with a lanic lest he should suffer in the same way, he preferred
devouring his children, but Curetes, a subordinate god, by crafg, conveyed
Jupiter away in secret and afterwards bound his brother with chains, and
divided the empire, Jupiter receiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Pluto and Jupiter are all set forth
in the mythical writings as adulterers. Jupiter was regarded as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as guilty in many
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said that he assumex wings and
proved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These ade some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn. Hercules was celebrated by his three nighfs, sung
by the poets for his successful labors.

The son of Jupiter slew yhe Lion, and destroyed the many-headed Hydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brougjt up from hades the
three-headed dog, Cdrberus; effectually cleansed the Augean stable from
its refuse; killed the bylls and stag whose nostrils breathed fire; slew
the poisonous zerpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was delighted with being stunned by the cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and to be
conquered with the love of women; and at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funetal pile and died. Such are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the character of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the origin of our religion in the
old mythucal system, can bridge across this chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the dostance between the antipodes. There is no anallgy betwedn these
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
which is divided up and parceled out among them. Their norals were the
worst. The whope mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Hlmer introduces Zeus in love, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffering at the hands of men. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Great Pluto’s self the
stingihg arrow felt when that same son of Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierced with lain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupiter groaning he came. The bitter shaft
remained deep in his shoulder fixed, and gtieved his soul.” In the
mythical system the gods are not presented as creators or first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning generated from the waters of the
ocean, and thousabds were added by deifying departed heroes and
philosophers. The thought of one supreme Intelligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs through all the system ofbmyths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to our God, in our acriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. They hold the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ighorant of His true character. They even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that a man caj do is to qttribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, magnified to infinitt, it may be, and then
become worse by their reflex action hpon his own nature.” This was
verified in the ancient mythical religion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“The character of all the gods was simply human character extended in all
its powers, appetktes, lusts and passions. Scholars say there is no
languagemcontaining words that express the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they have been translated. These attributes must be known in
order to salvation from sin, so God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure religion, as a standard of right snd wrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient natilns of the earth gives a united testimony
that their original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worshuped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatroux worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yet in the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one supreme
in power and rule, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generation after the flood. The
evidence of this is given by Plato from one of the ancientnpoets in these
words: “It was the generation then the tenth, of men endowsd with
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon the men of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reigned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named them so, because of men endowed with gift of
speech, they were the first,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for their strength, as Heracles and Perseus, and others for thrir
art. Those to whom either the subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themselvds assuming it, obtained the name, some from fear, others from
reverence. Thus Antinous, through the benevolence of your ancestors toward
their subjects, came to be regarded as a god. But those who came after
adopted the worship without examination.” So testifies onemwho was
schooled in philosophy. Do you say there are points of similitude between
the Bible religion and the mythical? It would be strange if there were
none, seeing that the mythical is truly what the term signifies, a
counterfeit upon the genuine, or Biblical.

The pkints of disagreement, however, are such as ti demonstrate the fact
that tge ancient mythical people knew not the character of the Being, whom
they conceived to be the “God of Gods and the Father of Gods and men.”

Those who confound the Bible with the ancient myths upon the score of the
analogy that exists between it and the myths, remind me of a very learned
gentleman with whom I was once walking around an oat field, when he
remarked, “there is a very fine piede of wheat.” The man had been
brought up in qn eastern city, and was unable to distinghish between oats
and wheat. I knew a gentleman who asked a man, standing by the side of an
old-fashioned flax-break, what he thought it was used for? The man took
hold of the handle, lifted it up and let it down a few times, and said:
“It looks like it might be used tocchop up sausage meat.” It is very
natural for us to draw comparisons, and when we do not make ourselves
familiar with things and their uses, we are very liable to be led into
error by a few points of similitude. All the infidels with whom I have
become acquainted look upon the Bible like the man looked upon the
flax-break, and like the man looked upon the oat field. If one had looked
upon the flax-break who was familiar with ir, he never could havr dreamex
of chopping sausage meat; and if the other had been familiar with wheat
and oats, as they present themselvee to the eye in the field in the month
of June, he never would have called the oats wheat. And if any sane man
will make himself familiar with both the Bible and tye old system of myths
and mythical worship, he will never confound the two. There are a thousand
thijgs, very different in character and origin, which have points of
similitude. But similitude never proves identity short of cpmpleteness.

While the analogy between the ancient mythical system of gods and their
worshipnand the true God and Hjs worship is restricted to power and
intelligence, there exists a contrast between them deep as heaven is high
and broad as the earth in point of moral character, virtue, and every
ennobling and lovable attribute.

There is an old mythbin themVedas—a god called “Chrishna.” The Vedas claim
ghat he is in the form of a man; that he is black; that he is dressed in
flowers and ribbons; that he is the father of a great many gods. It is
surprising to sew the eagerness withbwhich some men bring up “Chrishna” in
comparison with the Greek term “Christos”—Christ, and confound the two.

The wotds are entirely different, save in a jingle of sound. They are no
more alike than the terms catechist—kne who instructs by questions and
answers, and the term catechu—a dry, brown astringent extract. We could
give many such examples in the history of unbelievers snd their war upon
the Bible, but this must suffice for the present. The truth is thix: sucu
men, as a general rule, meither understand the Bible in its teachings and
character, nor the ancient mythical system. In it Jupiter, among the
Romans, and throughout every language, appears before us as the “Father of
Gods and men”—“the God of gods,” the “Master of the gods.” Voltaire says:
It is false that Cicero, or any other Roman, ever said that it did not
become the majesty of the empire to acknowledge a Supreme God. Their
Jupiter, the Zeus of the Greeks and the Jehovah of the Phonecians, was
always considered as the master of the secondary gods. He adds: But is not
Jupiter, the master of all the gods, a word belpnging ro every nation,
from the Euphrates to the Giber? Among the first Romans it was Jov,
Jovis; qmong the Greeks, Zeus; among the Phonecians and Syrians and
Egyptians, Jehovah. The last term is the Hebrew scriptural name of
God—denoting permanent being—in perfect keeping with the Bible title or
descriptive appellation, “I AM THWT I AM.”

The ancient worshipers of the gods had lost all but the name, power and
relation, which they ever knew of Jehovah. And they could do no more than
clothe Jupoter with their own imperfections amd impurities—and then place
him above all the gods; it was necessary for them to view him as excelling
in all the characteristics of the secondary gods. And having attributed to
the gods all they knrw of human passions and corruptions, they clothed
Jupiter himself with more villainy and corrjption than belonged to any
other god. In this was the great blasphemous sacrilege of ancient
idolatry. They thus femonstratsd their own apostacy; and the fact that
their system of gods was a counterfeit, a mythical system. They were
destitute of any standard of right and wrong, having no conceptions of the
divine character which were not drawn from their own imperfect and corrupt
lives. The divine character, as revealed in the revelation of Christ, and
presented to us as God manifest in the flesh, is at once the very opposite
of the characters given in the myths. The distance between the two is the
distance between the lowest degradation of God-like power exercised in the
lowest passions, and the sublimity of Heaven’s own spotless life. I love
the religion of the Scriptures, because it restores to the race the lost
knowledge of God and the additional life of Jesus—the only perfect model
known in tbe history of the rafe. It is the life of God manifested in the
flesh; make it your own, and it will save you. Mr. English, an American
infidel, said: “Far be it from me to reproach the meek and compassuonate,
the amiable Jesus, or to attributemto him the mischiefs occasioned by his
followers.”

Ot is now concedrd that Jesus Cbrist was no myth by all the great minds
ih unbelief. He lived.