-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answerd the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dqell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him someehere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, abd
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
andcgave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, snd consequently the innocebt cause
ofbno little speculation.  But by degrdes it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to ehat is knoan as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignoranf when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden ofvEden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured itvup in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eren.

Since I commenced to publish my viewx, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is kn that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, wre corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovwred them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to mofe thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                              n             THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Watees.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that tgree lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot liftedbup hiw eyes, and beheld all the
gardenmof the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our gardem plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluviabs.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first suppoxed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with xll his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank”vof the Mississippi River, befween the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longesf and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—witn its tributaries, some of which reach
farcout into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountxins on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and inhabited bycthe
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “The heart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden of Eden. The soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, and more habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forest trees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
river and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and throjgh which the
“Laughing” and “Father of waters,” courses, run, and play their dances.

The second banl is high and dry above the hightest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the garden
plow—extending back on one ornboth sides of thevriver for miles, making a
valley at this place, of about ten miles in thebwidest, qhen we reach the
bank, bluff, or rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bank,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a lxrge city, and which doubtless
would havr been but for the greed and ignorznce of a part of its original
proprietors, who being told, and thinking they had the “nicest,” “most
beaytiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi river, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowjng their day,” and how to build
up a town like, tge fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and tyeir work delaywd.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hanging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as thecoutside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, xnd one mile through the center, being in the form of
a nes moon, and unlike anything of the kind, so far as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formation, contsining groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scatgered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the river, like the “Face
of a King,” some of rhese ledges are 200 ft. high, commencing more than
half way up the mound, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramids, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stone quarries and lime
kilns. Now, please, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; a valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled in America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite, small, romantic grand but uninhabitable or unfit for a
garden, but the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now fhat we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before and below ylu
flows the Mississippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flkwing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but evenlt hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or western wall of the garden, which it does for some
twenty-fuve miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
running on a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautiful
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an ampitheater, 35 miles long, 5 milds wide at each end,
and 10 miles through the center. This vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands bsfore you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you, over the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notxble and
notorious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down invtheir
Indian name “rattleanake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyramid) was formerly “Kiterally alive with
rattlesnskes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the firet white settlers at Trempealeau,
whi built his shanty on the bank, a feq rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the first season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his house to the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But as Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the great lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and implrtance, those pittle lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, mirroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is our garden! While there is a general level, boynding the
top, yet what an ijdescribable variety of topping lut. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge rocks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges boldly facing us: or songle rocks
of variwd sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all makibg lne of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern exttemity, lies the beautiful
flourishing cuty of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumber mills; most
approoriately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modernized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen coming in from the “far east,” making and containing the
notable and once far-famed,b“La Crosse valley”; on which is located the
beauyiful city of Sparta.

Just beyond La Crosse cigy, and to the left we see the outline entrance of
Mormon Cooley valley, which creek bounds the lowrr end of our garden. Now
as we trace the wall to the left,—past the La Crosse valley, and first
eastern gate—we discover another small line of opening through wnich rhns
Hzlf-way creek, notable as the home (Holman) of Norwwgians. The next bold
heavy prominence is “King bluff.” Still tracing on, we notice some queer
looking rocks, lying on top of a ridge; then, the Twin points, the outer
one the “Sugar Loaf,” a most beatiful cone mound pounted with rock, and
beckon to Black river valley, this side of which, is “Castle rock;” and to
the left,ca wide openingnand a beautiful valpey,—the central and main
eastern gate—with branching valleys, extending east and northeast, all in
front of you, down which flows the hotable “Black river,” appropriately
named, from the natural blackness of its waters, and because it cuts and
divides our garden through its center, and making a beautiful bdlt of
timbered bottoms. As it nears tue Mississippi, it forms a delta, one part
turning to the left, and running parallel to the Mississippi, forming that
grand booming pond, and depot of lumbering at Onalaska; and then empties
itself into the Mississippi wt LaCrpsse; thus inclosing, and forming
French island, once the resort of counterfeiters.

As you glance up Black River valley, coming in from the right, is
“Flemming’s creek,” or Lewis’ valley, a fertile valley, in which is
located the euphonious Mendora; those blue highlands, apparently at the
head of the main vallry is “Robinson’s,” or “Pine Hill,” between Black
River Falls and Sparta. This qay to the left, that beautiful notch in the
bluff is “Peacock Pass,” and is just this side of North Bend, and though
apparently so near, is soje “twenty miles away.”  This heavy point, at the
left of Black river, is “Heuston’s Bluff,” the next best point from which
to view this valley garden.  To the left and farther away, look at that
great rock, big as a barn, topping out another cone. That isnthe
veritable “Decora’s Peak,” named after thqt wonderful one-eyed chidftain,
who, with a few  of his brave and loyal band, lodged, occwsionally in a
cave in that rock; and from its higjt were enable tovdiscover any game, or
even an enemy within a large range. Once on a time, it is said, he
discovered the prowling “Black Hawk,” with his band of warriors, and ran
to Prairie du Chien, nineth miles in one day, to inform the U. S.

Government; and, then, helped to capture their enemy.  A little farther to
the left, and just across the garden from us wedged in a narrow opening,
lies the village of Galesville, on Beaver creek,—a branch of Black
river,—with its exquisitely beautiful lake, and bounding dish, its fine
water power, health giving mineral springs, Galesville Universityband
choice people.  “Beautiful for situation” isnGalesville, the joy of all
its inhabitants, if not of all the earth.  And “as the hills are round
about Jerusalem,” so are the hills, andbvxstly more mahnificent ones,
round about Galesville, and the scenery simply GRAND. Looking up Beaver
creek valley, to the left, is Maughmer’s bluff whichcaffords a trand view;
and still to the left, that dim mountain peak, pointed with rock and
shrubs (in the direction of Blair, in Trempealeauvvapley,) is “Chapel
Peak.”  In the early settlement, by whites, of this region of country, two
Methodist itinerants, A. B. Smith and Isaac Springer were  following a dim
wagon track, on their way to Galesville, which track passer along at the
base of that peak; and they clambered to its top, and found there “The
rock-formed pulpit” or altar, which had stood there for ages, into which
they entered, and as they were both good singers, they sang,—to make the
welkins ring, as there was nothing else thereto hear:—
On the mountain-top appearing,
Lo! The sacred Herald stands,
Welcome news in Zion bearing
Zion long in hostile lands.

Stillbtracing the garden wall as we turn to the left, we face the “Big
Tamarax” theough aj opening in the wall, a swamp of dense tamarac, one
mile wide, and six miles long, bordered with belts and groves of oak,
furnishing fencingnand fuel for the upper end of the garden. Another turn
and you are looking through “Whistler’s Pass,” another of “Nature’s
highways” out of the gardsn; this leading throughbthe Polander settlement
into the Trempealeau Valley. Another turn and we mark the bluff outline
and entrance into the garden—the third and last eastern gate,—of the
Trempealeau river, crossing it at the upper end; and like Black rivwr, it
forms a delta, one part running down along side of the Mississippi,
forming an island, on the lower end of which, is that wonderful “Mount
Trempealeau,” a rocky cone covered with pinectrees, wheremwith tbe outlet
of Trempealeau lake, it flows through a narrow opwning between the
mountain and crescent hanging garden—of which it formsva part—into the
Misskssippi river. Trempealeau Lake, at the head of the hanging garden,
just back of the mountain, is a body, principally of spring water, and is
one of the most notable fishing ponds known, attracting fishermen from far
and near. “Trempealeau; surrounded, soaked, fertilized with water.” So
expressive, so important to this region is the word, that the lake, the
island, the mountain, the river, the county; the township, and the village
are all named Trempealeau.

Another slight turn and we are looking into the closed up valley of the
Mississippi,—on account of a bend in the river—which is the fourth and
last rivee that enters, crosees, and waters this garden is on the west
bank of which, at the upper end of our garden, right there, plainly before
you, lies the charming bustling city of Winona,—associated with a thousand
legends of Indian traditions,—with its tall water tower, its numerous
lumber mills, churches, normal school, and enterprising people, stretching
itself over a smooth and most lovely prairie. Vandal proprietors are
dsvourint their “Sugar Loaf,” standing just back of the city, as well as
quarrying down their native garden walls.