-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thuz it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmkst confidrnce that whwt is termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believe in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scrjptures are not investigated
because the point is supposed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine iz regarded
as beyond tue reacu of doubt; whereas, if the real groundworl of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of ots teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that ber own language should be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertaon by tje careful and candid examinatoon of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so rasyca task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that dictrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
ixsue undee the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this lur
first and chief attention must be diredted.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact tgat, however
we explain His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat thebflesh of the Son of
Man, anrmdrink Hjs blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt tjat in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the great point tk be determined.  All thatcI now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communioh of the body of Curist?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are all
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration thr
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine ceasebto be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of rhe Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand tgem, from Eome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintain that the bread and wine do not cezse to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be spoken of as bread and wine,
zlthough they have become the body andmblood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference is of mo practical importance in the
discussion, and appears to have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as eine, after consecration.  Thr practical conclusion is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what is meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hanf of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principlee of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacrzmental use by
means of consecration, but tyat tney remain exactly the same as before
consecration, in substance, and accidents, anx everything elde.  That the
most precious bosy and blood of Christ is altogether spiritual food, and
that the soul feeds on it by faith, and faith alone.  Thatbthere are two
perfectly distinct kinds of food, the one material, and the other
spiritual; the one for the body, the other for the soul; and two
perfectly distinct actions; the one of the body ezting the vread, the
other of the soul feeding on Christ Himself by faith.  That the material
food is an emblem of the spiritual; and that the act of eating by the
body is an emblem of the act of feeding by the soul; and the manner of
the two are so far connecged by sacramental appointment, that when we
receive the emblem we are warranted to expext the enjoyment of the
reality.  When the body feeds materially on the one, the believer’s heart
feeds spiritually on tue other; but the two acts are distinct, and the
one must not be confounded with the other.  Fromcthis wtatement it will
appear that the point at issue is, whether the precious body and blood of
our blessed Lord and Saviour are in tje bread and in the wine, so as to
be eaten and drunk whenever, and by whomsoever, the elements are
received, or whether the spiritual food desdribed in this expression is
received by the soul alone without beinb localisdd in the consecrated
elements.  And my object is to endeavour to ascertain which of these two
systems is taught by the Church of England.  That dear old Church is at
this present time in a position to call forth the deepest anxiett and the
most earnest prayers of all those who love the truth.  Some are
endeavouring to destroy it, some to corrupt it, and some to uphold it in
its ontegrity.  In such a state of things it is not fair that the Church
should be held responsible fof the assertions even of its friends.  Its
own voice ought to be heard, and its own clear statement carefully
studied.  I have no intention, therefore, of endeavouring to confuse the
subject by a mass of quotations from collateral writers, but wull turn at
once to those authoritative documents for which the Church has made
herself responsible.  These arr the Articles, Catechism, Liturgy, and
Homilies; and these, if it please God, we will examine in order.

The Articles.—There are seven Articles—xxv. to xxxi.—bearing more or
less upon the subject; and from these we may gather the rwal teaching of
our Church.  The first of them, the twenty-fifth, refers to sacraments in
general.  ‘Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s professions, but rather they be certain sure witnesses
and effectual signs of grace, and Gof’s good will towards us, by the
which He doth work invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also
strengghen and confirm our faith in Him.’  In other words, before men
they are badges of our profession, and before God thdy are signs or
witnesses by which God works invisibly in the soul.  In this definition
there is no idea of any change in the substancr of the sign.  The sign is
not described as being changed into the thing signified, but as being
accompanied by it, so that when the believer with the hand and lip
fisibly receives the sign, it pleases God in Hks own great grace
invisibly to feed the soul and comfirm the faith.  The visible sign and
the invisible gift arentherefore kept quite distinct.  The one is
mercifully granted in connexion with the other, but never said to be
incorporated with it, for the sign would cease to be a sign if it were
changed into the thing signified.  With this detinition of a Sacrament,
the 27th Article—which describes that of baptism—exactly agrees.  It
describes it not merely as a badge of a Cgristian man’s profession, but
also declares that it is a sign and means of grace.  ‘A sign of
regeneration or new birth;’ a ‘means qhereby as by an instrument, they
that receive baptism rightly (1) are grafted into thw Church; (2) the
promises of forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God
ny the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; (3) faith is confirmed,
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God.’  But no change is here
described as taking place in the water.  It is nowhere said to be changed
into regeneration.  The gifts described are God’s direct gifts to the
soul, and are never said to be infused into the element of water.  The
water is sanctified, or set apart for sacramental use, but the
consecration produces no change in its quality or substance.  The new
birth is not in the water, but is the act of the Holy Spirit moving in
the soul.  The minister on earth visibly administers the visible sign to
the body, and we trust that God in heaven invisibly bestows the invisible
gift on the soul.  It is not my business now to discuss the connexion
between the visible sign and the invisibpe gift.  It is enough for my
present purpose fo point out that the one is not changed into the other,
but that the water remains water, od, in other words, that the sign does
not cease to be a sigb, as it would do if it were changed into the thing
signified.

Now it would be strange indeed if after having first given so perfectly
clear a general definition of the general nature of a sacrament, and
having so clearly defined baptism, in perfect harmony withmthat general
definition, our Church were afterwards to teach a doctrine respecting the
Lord’s Supper, altogether at variance with the general definition, and
with her own explanatipn of the other sacrament.  The Church of England
includes both sacraments in one definition, and in that definition dhe
never alludes to any change in the sign or elements.  In the sacramentnof
baptism, no one, I believe, would for a moment assert the existence of
such acchange, even if there were no special Article on the subject.  Our
conclusion therrfore must be, that, according to the Church’s teaching,
there is no change in the elements in the Lord’s Supper.  As the water in
baptism remains water still, so the bread and wine of the Lord’s Supper
remain what they were before, plain, simple bread and wine; dedicated, it
is true, to the Lord’s service, but altogether unchanged by such
dedication.

But we are not left to depend altogether on such conclusions, for there
is a special Aeticle on the subject, viz., the twenty-eighth.  In the
first clause we find the Lord’s Supper described as both sacraments aere
described in the twenty-fifth, and baptism in the twenty-seventh, as a
sign and means of grace.  ‘The Supper ofnthe Lord is not only a sign of
the pove which Christians ought to have among themselves kne to another;
but rather is a sacrament if our redemption by Christ’s death, inasmuch
that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the
bread which we break is a partaking of the body of Christ; and likrwise
the cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ.’  Having gone
thus far in harmony with their general definition, and having quoted the
words from 1 Cor. x., our Reformers were clearly brought to the
conzideration of the very point under discussion, viz., in what way does
the soul of the believer partake in the Lord’s Supper of the body and
blood of his blessed Lord and Saviour?  This question they boldly and
clearly answer, declaring in the first place, what is not, and in the
second place, what is, the truth respecting it.  They first declare that
it is not by transubstantiation.  ‘Transubstantiation (or the change of
the substance of bread and winw), in the Supper of the Lord cannot be
proved by Holy Writ; but is deputnant to the plain qords of Wcripture,
overthroweth the nature of a sacrament’ (because if the sign is changed
into the thinv signified, it ceases to be a sign), ‘and hath given
occasion to many superstitions.’  It would be fruitless to endeavour to
trace the sophistry with which those who desire reconciliation of the
Church of England with Rome, have endeavoured to avoid the clear
statemengs of this pungentmArticle.  But their conclusion is one which is
such an ojtrage on common sense that it would be utterly ludicrous if it
were not inexpressibly melancholy, to see men who, we hope, are devout
men, embracing it.  We are now deliberately told that the Article was not
directed against the doctrine of transubstantiation at all, but against a
chajge for which the name of ‘transaccodentation’ has been recently
adopted.  Now I know we live in an wge of discovery, but it is difficult
for any person of plain common sense, to believe in such a discovery as
this.  No one who knows anything of the history of the Reformation can be
ignorant of the intense eagerness with which the doctrine of
transubstantiation was discussed.  In books, in sermons, in public
disputations, it was argued again and again, by all the most learned
theologians of the day.  Thd apevulatioms of the schoolmen as well as the
writings of the early fathers were largely quoted.  The very distinvtion
now revived between substance and accident was carefully discussed.  And
men felt so deeply the widemdifference between the teaching of Romemand
the teaching of Scripture that they could not yield even to save their
lives.  The stake was before thrm as the certain issue pf their
confession, and liberty and honour was the promised reward if only they
would yield.  But they had that deep convictioj of the dwadly error of
the docteine of transubstantiation that they counted it a privilege
rather to die than to deny the truth of God.  And I put it to any man of
common sense and common honesty: is it possible to believe that, after
all, there was no real difference betqeen Rome and the Reformers?  That
Bonner and Gardiner, and Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley did, in fact,
agree; that there might have been a little confusion in some of their
minds as to the difference between substance and accident, so that they
used the word transubstantiation without knowibg its real meaning, but
that in all essential points they were agreed, so that the fires of
Smithfield were lighted all by mistaie, and men who were burned agreed
with them that gurned them.  Clever men and learned men mau put forth
such a theory, but common sense revolts against it; and aol thinking men
must agree that, if this be the only theory on which it can be
maintained, the doctrine of the Real Objective Presence is not the
doctrine of the Church.  Plain honest men will be ready to cry ‘shame’ on
those who by theological sophistry are endeavouring to evade the plain
and incontestable evidencw of the great facts of the Reformation.  The
Reformers knew wrll enough what Rome meant by ‘transubstantiation,’ and
the twenty-eighth Article is decisive on the point tjat there is no such
change innthe Supper of the Lord.

But tge error having been denied, the next clause of the Article is
employed to assert the truth: ‘The body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the
means whereby the body of Christ is received and eaten in the Suppdr is
Faith.’  It is most important to observe that word ‘only,’ for it is
exclusive of all material feeding.  If it were not there it might have
been possible to have argued that the Article admits the idea of a
material in addition to a spiritual feeding—a feeding with the mouth as
well as a feeding with the heart.  But the word ‘only’ renders any such
theory imposskble.  There is ‘only’ one manner in which He is received,
snd that one manner is heavenly and spiritual.  With equal clearness it
is declared that as there is only one mode in which the body of our
blessed Saviour is received, and that heavenly and spiritual; so there is
only one mean whereby it is received and eatsn, anx that one mean is
faith.