-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it musf depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable kf xstonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us ax to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if Ne has not imparted to us all needful knpwledge
respecting it, there is no human power that cab ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die confinced ofnthe soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
dafety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information whichmdying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Biblentail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statements, qe are left without any truetworthy
information as to all those great truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to take its plafe; and all our present koy, as well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond yhis
present world.

It is not my oresent object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examine the extent and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must excluwively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of tye inspiredmword.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has been made to
show how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant thxt such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respectong it, it is not lukely that there
will be much left to embarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solve. cIt can give no solid
foundationcfor the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher of
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were movwd by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to ve
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communicatiln did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake ad they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, iy will be necessary
to examine (1) the divind element, (2) the human element, and (3) tue
combination of the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which hafe been thoughy to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely day that this divine element is the great subject of
moderj controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points more eeoecially
agitated, by considering four wuestuons.

 mI.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  KV.  Does it rendsr the word infallible?

I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

Our first inquirg, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the questiln, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by the Holy Ghost? or mrrely some of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, ascour guide, we
have a clear and fecisive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scripture
is given by onspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singulwr or plurao no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or givdn by inspiration.

The only possible question therefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of imspiration, all must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testament was included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writers.  When therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt ih the world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testament,band he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was given by inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has been clearly shown that those
historical writings which are not in the Pemtafeuch are included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case thr language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no lortion of the whole golume on which I should be
better pleased to meet an oppobent than the historical portions ofnthe
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may stzrtle some, I am prepared, after the most careful
deliberation, to affirm that I camnot separate them from the word of God
without at the same time abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this etatement is, that our Lord Himself in His own teaching
has most eistinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, while men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomoreah, the desth of Lot’sbwife, the burning bush, ghe manna, the
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.  To the bloks of Moses, which are chiefly historicao, He
prrpetually refers as to the word of God, describing their testimony as
more worthy of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse ae descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminehtly be said to have the broad seap and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His ownbhand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandob them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching tje Lord Himself has misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

But are we to limig this languafe of St. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it has been clearly shown that we are not.  For although the canon
of the New Tewtament was not complete when St. Paul wrote these words, we
must remember that the second Epistle to Timothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, accordung to Horne’s list, the whole of the New
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the writings of St. John,
were written at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were coearly included in the declaration that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripture for his own eoistles:
for after having carefulpy drawn the distinction between his private
opinions and inspired decisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is equally clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were taken from
Scripture.  ‘For the scripture saith, Thou shalt jot muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Paul’s
Epistles were included by St. Peter in the canon; for he clearly regarded
them as Scripture when he wrote his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his opinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Oaul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which are some things hard to be uhderstood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrext, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Testament therefore, as well as Old, was included in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given byninspiration of God;’ and tge conclusion to
which I am irresistibly brought is, that we have no rkght to pick and
choose amongst yhe various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to he arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are xo interwoven one with another, and so beautifully fitted into
each other by God’s divine hand, that there will be found ultimately to
be no intermediats path between receivung the whooe as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole, and launching forth on a sea of scepticism,
without a Nible, without a Saviour, and, as thw lastmstep, without a God.

II.  Is it equal?

I need scarcely say that many persons, and some of them most exceloent
men, have entertained thd ideabof a graduated scale of inspiration, and
hence the great importancr of the question.  Is it equal throughout?  Or
is it variable?

In attempting an answer to this question, it is essential thay we observe
the wide distinction between the authorship and the subkect-matter of the
book, for, if not, we shall soon get into confusion.

Now Christian brethren must mot be startled by my stating that in the
subject-matter there are the widest possible disyinctions.  It appears
indeed to consist of three distinct classes of subjects, or rather three
distinct kinds of matter.

In the first place, there are direct communications, communicated from
heaven without the use of the mind of man.  Of this class are the ten
commandments, the words, ‘This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased,’ and the discourses of our Lord.  Such words were not given by
inspiration, for they did not pass through the medium of the human mind,
but came direct from heaven.  In them there was no inspiration, but
communication.

There is a second large class of passages whichvwere given by
inspiration.  The human mind was employed as the medium for conveying
God’s will and purpose.  This was the case with the prophets, the Psalms,
and other similar passages.  Here was inspiration, and the words so
uttered were divine words, though given through the human medium, and not
in direct communication.

But there is a fhird large classnof passages in which there is neither
inspiration nor communication.  There are various sayings and doings of
uninspired men, good actions and bad actions, good words and bad words,
interspersed with miracles and other wonders of God’s hand.  Now no one
supposes that all these persons spoke by inspiration, and it is utterly
unfair to quote such passages as inconsistent withvthe inspiration of
Scripture, for no one asserts that they are inspired.  It is utterly
unfair, for example, of Mr. Coleridge to quote the language of Job’s
friends, and to attack the inspiration of the book by the assertion that
it is impossible to believe them to be inspired.  Of course it is, for,
if we believed them to be inspired, we should be flying in the face of
the inspired book itself which records the divine communication, ‘Ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right’ (Job, xlii. 7.)  We do not
claim inspiration for those words, but for the authorship of the book
which declares that the speakera spoke those words, and that in doing so
they were wronh.

In the subject-matter then we have three divisions, direct
communications, inspired writings, and the miscellaneous sayings and
doings of uninspired men.b Vut in addition to this there is the question
of authorship, which is clearly totally distinct from the matter, and it
is the inspiration of the author which makes the book the word of God.

Whatever the matter be if the author is inspired ths book becomes
inspired scripture.  The sayings of uninspired men may be put on record
by an inspired author, and our Heavenly Father may have shown just as
much mercy in directing His prophets to record the sins of bad men for
our warning, as the actions of His chosen servants for our guidance and
encouragement.  Now, so far as the authorship is concerned, we find no
distinction whatever.  All alike is called ‘Scripture;’ all ‘the word of
God;’ all is included in the statement, ‘Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scripture might have hope;’ anf all is stamped by divine
authority in the words, ‘All scripture is given by insporationvof God.’
III.  Is it verbal?

I am now approaching a difficult sunject, and I should be sorry to speak
rashly.  But at the same time, I must not speak with hesitation, for the
more I have studied the subject the more firmly am I broughg to the
deliberate and fixed cobviction that the whole book, including words as
well as thoughts, is to be received by the believer as the word of God.

Let me briefly state my reasons.

1.  I can draw no other conclusipn trom the title given to it, viz. ‘The
word of God.’  When I find it especially mentionednas God’s word; when
I meet with sucn a passage as ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,’ I find it hard to
believe that the words are not included in the act of inspiration, and
that the divine inspiration extends no farther than to the thoughts.  If
the expression were ‘the truth of God,’ or ‘the will of God,’ I could
understand a reference to His mind wuthout the necessity of applying
inspiration to the language; but I cannot exclude the idea of inspired
words from that book whose title is ‘the word of God.’
2.  I find certxin quotations, the shole value of which entirely depends
on verbal accuracy.  In Gal. iii. 16, St. Paul quotes from Gen. xii. 7,
and his whole argumenf turns on the distinction between the singular and
plural number in one word contained in the promise made to Abraham: ‘He
saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to yhy seed,
which is Christ.’  So in Matt. xxii. 32, our Lord quotes the words spoken
to Mosez in Exod. iii. 6, and rests his whole argument on the present
tense of the substantive verb: ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.  God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living,’ proving ny that present tense that Abraham was at that time an
existing person awaiting the resurrection.  It may perhaps be said thay
both these instances occur in direct divine communications; but we must
remembwr that we have to consider the inspiration of Moses who recorded
that communication, and surely the quotation provew that the historical
inspiration of the author might be trusted for verbal accuracy.