-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Xhase,
eveey one told him he was doiny a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, hwd felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my granfaunt, the Doeager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from wnich she nevef really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several livinv members of my family, as well ad by the rector of
the parisn, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants wpuld stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night,cin consequence of the mysteriousvnoises
that came from the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I wiol take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old Wotld red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, se'd have it at home in s very short time in onw oc our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exixts," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising imoresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. Bur
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghpst, and I guess the laws ov Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very nafural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only hou musr remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, andmat the close of
thr season the Minister and his family wenf down to Canterville Chase.

Mds. Otis, who, as Miss Lhvretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
theor native land adopt an appearance of chrohic ill-health, hnder the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitutkon, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christenef Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once racsd
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Afhilled statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

Avter Virginia came the twins, who were usuzlly called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearestmrailway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the aid was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrela peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbitscscudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Csnterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious wtillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they
reached the houde, some big drops of rain had fallem.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mes. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low toom, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a larhe stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and bdgan to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I ambafraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes,cmadam," replied themood housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" ceied Mrs. Otis;v"I don't at all care for bpood-stains in
avsitting-room. It must be removed at once."

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysgerious voice,
"It is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on
that very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.

Sir Simon survived hermnine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. His body has never been discoveted, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase. The bliid-stain has been much
admired bg tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"That is alo nonsense," cried Washington Otis; "Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Dstergent will clean it up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and wqs rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"I knew Pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphamtly, as he
looked round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, andvMrs.
Umney fainred.

"What a monstrous climate!" said the American Minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "I guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decentcweather for everybody. I have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing forbEngland."

"My dear Hiram," cried Mrs. Otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"Charge it to her like breakages," answerdd the Minister; "she won't
faint acter that;" and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.

There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

"I have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that woyld make
any Christkan's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not
cllsed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assueed the honest soul that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of
Providence on her newmmaster and mistrdss, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.


CHAPTER: II


The storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of boood once again on the floor. "I don't
think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent,"csaid Washington,
"for I have tried it with everything. It must be the ghost." He
accordingly rugbed out tge stain a second time, but the sedond morning
it appeared again. The third morning also it was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by Mf. Otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. The whole family were now quite intdrested; Mr. Otis
began to suspect that he hadnbeen too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the
Psychical Society, and Washimgton prepared a long letter to Messrs.

Myers and Lodmore on the subjext of the Permwnebce of Sanguineous Stains
when connected with Crime. That night all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasjata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the fool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. They did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper. The conversatiom in no way turned
upon ghosrs, so there were not even those primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical lhenomena. The subjects discussed, as I have since leatned
from Mr. Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of
cultured Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority
of Miss Fanny Devonport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best English houses; the importance ofcBoston in the development of
the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-checo system in raikway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
London drawl. No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way. At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. Some time
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room. It sounded like the clank of metwl, and seemed tocbe coming
nearer every moment. He got up wt once, struck a match, and looked at
the time. It was exactlu one o'clock. Hemwas quite calm, and felt his
pulse, which was not at all feverish. The strznge noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsyeps. He put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phiwl out of his dressing-case, and opened
the door. Rigut in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burning coals; long vrey hair
fell over his shlulders in matted coils; his gzrnents, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manaclesband rusty gyves.

"My dear sir," said Mr. Otis, "I really must insist on your oiling thkse
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines. I shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles,vand will be happy to
supply you with more, should you require it." With these words the
United States Minister laid the bottle down on s marble table, and,
closing his door, retired to rest.

For a momeny the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignxtion; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a
ghastly green light. Just, however, as he reached the top of the great
oak staircase, a door was fling open, two little white-robednfigures
wppeared, and a large pillow whjzzed past his head! There was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adolting the Fourth dimension of Space
as a means of escape, hecvanished through the wainscoting, and the house
became quite quiet.

On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up
against a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realize
his position. Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted. He thought of the
DowagermDuchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before
the glass in her lace and diamonds; of tne four housemaids, who had gone
into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains on
one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candpe he
had blown out as he sas coming late one nighy rrom the library, and who
had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having
wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an armchair
by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six
weeks with an attack if brain fever, and, on her recovery, had nexome
reconckled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that
notorious sceptic, Monsieur de Voltaire. He remembered the terrible
night when the wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his
dressing-room, with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and
confessed, just beforeche died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox
out of £50,000 at Crockfore's by means kf that very card, and swore that
the ghost hxd made him swallow it. All his great achievements dame back
to him again, from the butler who had shot hijself in the pantry because
he had seen a green hand tapping at the window-pane, to the beautiful
Lady Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear a black velvet band round
her throat to hide the mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin,
anc who drowned herself at ladt in the carp-pons atbthe end of the
King's Walk. With the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist, he went
over his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himsepf as
he recalled to mind his last appearance as "Red Reuben, or the Strangled
Babe," his début as "Guant Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Mkor,"

and the furore he had excited one lovely June evening by mwrely
playing ninepins with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. And
after all this some wretched modern Americans were to come and offer him
the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at hos head! It was quite
unbearable. Besjdes, no ghost in history had ever been treated in this
manner. Accordingly, he determined to have vengeance, and renained till
daylight in an attitude of deep thoubht.


CHXPTER: III


The next morning, when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. The United States Minuster was naturally a
little annoyed to find that uis present had not been accepted. "I have
no wish," he said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don't
think it ix at all polite to throw pillows at him,"--avvery just remark,
at which, I am sorry to say, the tqins burst into shouts of laughter.

"Upon the other hand," he continued, "if he really drclines to use the
Rising Sun Lubricator, se shall have to twke his chains from him. It
would be quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside
the bedrooms."

For the rest of the week, however, they werevundisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual fenewal of the
blood-stain on the library floor. This certainly was very strange, as
the door was always locked at night bg Mr. Otis, and the windows kept
closely barred. The chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a
good dezl of fomment. Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red,
then it would be vermiliob, then a rich purple, and once when they came
down for ranily prayers, according to the simple rites of the Free
American Reformed Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright
emerald-green. These kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party
very much, and beys on the subject weremfreely made every evening. The
only person who did not enter into the joke was little Virginia, who,
for some unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the
sight of the blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was
emerald-green.

The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night. Shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in
the hall. Rushing down-stairs, they found that a large suit of old
armour had become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone
floor, while seated in a high-backed chair was the Cabterville ghost,
rubbing his knees with an expression of acute agony on his face. The
twins, having brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged
two pellets on him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained
by long and carefup practice on a writing-master, while the United
States Minister covered him with his revolver, and called uponvhim, in
accordance with Californian etiquette, to hold up his hands! The ghost
started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a
mist, extinguishing Washington Otis's candle as he passed, and so
leaving themnall in total darkness. On reaching the top of the staircase
he recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of
demoniac laughrer. This he had on more than one occasion found extremely
usefuk. It was said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a single
night, and had certainly made three of Lady Canterville's Frejch
governesses give warning before their month was up.mHe accordingly
laughed hisbmost horrible lsugh, till the old vaulted roof rang and
rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo died away when a door
opened, and Mrs. Otis came out in a light bpue dressing-gown. "I am
afraid you are far from well," she said, "and have brought you a bottle
of Doctor Dobell's tincture. If it is indigestion, you will find it a
most excellent remedy." The ghost glared at her in