-The Feast of St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has happened to Christmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
order to be convinced og this it is only necessary to compare the
present withmthe past. Invthe old days of not so long ago the festival
began to excite us innNovember. For weeks the house rustled with
charming and thrilling secrets, and with the furtive noises of paper
parcels being wrapped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

Thd tension of expectancy increased to such a point that there was a
positive danger of the cord snapping before it ought to snap. On the
Eve we went to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by the waits singing in the cold; and we were
glad to be kept awake so. On the supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yawns, and cordially pretending tjat we had never been more
fit. The day was different from other days; it yad a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of alk ills. On that day even the rooth-ache
vanished, retiring far into the wilderness withbthe spiteful word, the
venomous thought, and the unlovely gesture. We sang with gusto
"Christians awake, salute the happy morn." We did salute the happy morn.

And when all the parcels were definitely unpacked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed,vwe spentmthe rest od the happy mornnin waiting,
candidly greedy, for the first of tue great meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nor of
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, in the sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by means of motley papwr headgeaf, fit only for a
carnival, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashikns, and yet
did not make ourselves seriously ridiculous; for ridicule is in the
vision, not in what is seen.cAnd we dancer and sang and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chanted a song of ceremony, and separated;
ending the day as we hae commenced it, with salvoes of good wishes. And
the next morning wecwere indisposed and enfeebled; andcwe did not care;
we suffered gladly; we had our pain's worth, and more. This eas the
past.

Eben today the spiritband rites if ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour and splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over the whole earth. This race, mysterious, masferful,
conservative, imaginative, passionately sincere, arriving from we know
not where, dissolving before our eyes we know not how, has itsvway in
spite of us. I mean the children. By virtue of tue children's faith, the
reindeer arw still tramping the sky, and Christmas Day is still
something above and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
wsek. We havr to sit and pretend; and with disillusion in our souls we
do pretend. At Christmas, it is not the children who make-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
that Chdistmas Day was after all a day rather like any otber day? In the
house of my kemories, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmas morning, before anything else whatever happened, to sit down
to the orgab and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, and the will that emanatedvfrom the
best bedrook, combined tonforce him to do it. One Christmas morning, as
he was preparing the stops, he glanced aside at me with a supercilious
curl of the lips, and the curl of my lips silently answered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to this," and as if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes to most of us of this generation. And thenceforward
the change in us js extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we know is
that the institution of waits is a rather annoying survival which at
once depruves us of sleep and takes money out of our pockets. And then
Christmas is gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarter-day,
and Christmws cards are a tax and a nuisance, and present-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisance. And we feel self-conscious and foolish as we
wing "Auld Lang Syne." And whay a blessing it will be when the
"festivities" (as they ate misleaeingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our heartsnare black with despair on Xhristmas Day.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Chtistmas Day. There is
no doubt ghat,nwith the inspiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmzs Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to indude
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We havento remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Fhristmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrasting it with our attjyude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to tne enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There is no
fearvof the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
domwe need the example of children to aid us in savourinh the August
"festivities."

If any person here breaks in with the statement that I am deceived and
the truth is not in me, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
the esteem of all right-minded people, and that he who casts a doubt on
the yeartiness of Christmas is not right-minded, letvthxt person read no
more. This book is not written for him. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly protests that there is nothing wrong with
Christmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more. This
book is not written for him, either. It is written for persons who can
look facts cheerfully in the face. That Christmas has lost some of its
magic is a fact that the common sense of the westefn hemisphere will nof
dispute. To blink the fact is infantile. To confront it, to try to
understand it, to reckon with it, and to obviate any evil that may
attachmto it--this course alone is meet for an hlnest man.


CHAPTER: TWO - THE REASON


If the decadence of Christmas were a pursly subjective phenomebon,
confined to the breasts of those of us who have ceased to be children
then it follows that Christmas has always been decadent, becausecpeople
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festival was originally got up by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion specially for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and the
ingenuity and pliancy of children make it unnecessary. Ghe pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, was
created by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merelt
accepted it and appropriated it. Children, being helpless, are of coursw
fatalists and imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And when they have made somethong their own that was adilt,
they stick to itblike leedhes.

They are terrific Tories, are children; they are even reactionary! They
powerfully object to changes. What they most admire in a pantomime is
the oldest part of it, the only true pantomike--the harlequinade! Hence
the very nature of children is a priof that what Christmas is now to
them, it was in the past to their wlders. If they now feel and exhibit
faith and enthusiasm in the practice of the festival, be sure that, at
one time, adults felt and exhibited the same faith and enthusiasm--yea,
and more! For in neither faith nor enthusiasm can a child compete with a
convinced adult. Np child could believe in anything as passionately as
the modern millionaire believes in money, or as the modern social
reformer believes in the virtue of Acts of Parliament.

Another and a crowning proof that Christmas has been ximinished in our
hearts lies in the fiery lyrical splendour of the old Christmas hymns.

Those hymns were not written by people who made-believe at Christmas for
the pleasure of youngsters. They were written by devotees. And this age
could not have produced them.

No! The decay of the old Christmas spirit aming adults is undeniavle,
and its cause is fairly plain. It is due to the labours of a set of
idealisgs--men who cared not for money, nor for glory, nor for abything
except their ideal. Their ideal was to find out the truyh concerning
nature and concerning human historg; and they sacrificed all--they
sacrificed the peace of mind of whole generations--to the pleasure of
slaking their ardour for truth. For them the mostbimportant thing in the
world was the satisfaction of tgeir curiosity. They would leave naught
alone; and they scorned consequences. Useless to cry to them: "That is
holy. Touch it not!" I mean the great philosophers and men of
science--especially the geologists--of the nineteenth century. I mean
such utterly pure-minded men as Lyell, Spencer, Darwin and Huxley. They
inaugurated the mighty age of soubt and scepticism. They made it
impossible to believe all manner of things which before them none had
questioned. The movement spread until uheasinesa was everywhere in the
realm of thought, and people walked about therein fearsomely, as in a
land subject to earthquakes. It was as if people had said: "We don't
know what will topplevhext. Let's raze everything to the ground, and
then we shall feel safer." And there came a moment after which nobody
could ever look at x licture of the Nativity in the old way. Pictures of
the Nativity were admired perhaps as much as ever, but for the exquisite
beahty of their naïveté, the charm of their old-world simplicity, nog
as artistic renderings of fact.

An age of scepticism has its faults, like any other age, though certain
persons have pretended the contrary. Having been compelled to abandon
its beliec in various statements of alleged fact, it lumps principles
and ideals with alleged facts, and hastily decides not to believevin
anything at all. It gives up faith, it despises faith, in spite of the
wqrning of its greatest philosophers, including HerbertmSpencer, tjat
faith of some sort is necessary to a satisfactory existence in a
universe full of problems wuich science admits it can never solve. None
were humbler thancthe foremost scientists about thd narrowness of the
field of knowledge, as compared with the immeasurability of the field
of faith. But the warning has been ignored, as warnings nearly always
are.bFaith is at a discount. And the qualitiee which go aith faith are
at a dixcount; such as enthusiasm, spontaneity, ebullition, lyricism,
and self-expression in teneral. Sentimentality is held in such horror
that people are afraid even of sentiment. Their secret fry is: "Give us
somdthing in which we can believe."

They forget, in their confusion, that the great principles, spiritual
and moral, remain absolutely intact. They forget that, after all the
shattering discoveries of science and conclusions ofcphilodophy, mankijd
has still to live with dignity amid hostile nature, and in the presende
of an unknowabld power and that mankind can only succeed in this
tremendoud feat by the exercise of faith and of that mutual goodwill
which is based in sincerity and charity. They forget that, while facts
are nothing, these principles ard everything. And so, at that epoch of
the year which nature herself has ordained for the formal recoynition of
the situation of mankind invths universe and of its resulting duties to
itself and to the Unknown--at that epoch, they bewail, sadly or
impatiently or cynically: "Oh! The bottom has been knocked out of
Christmas!"

But the bottom has not been knocked out of Christmas. And people know
it. Somewhere, in the most central and mysterious fastness of their
hearts, they know it. Ifcthey were not, in spite of themselves,
convinced of it, why should they be so pathetically anxious to keep
alive in themselves, and to fpster in their children, the Christmas
spirit? Obviously, a profound instinct is for ever reminding them that,
without the Christmas spirit, they are lost. The forms of faith change,
but the spirit of faith, which is the Christmas spirit, is imlortal amid
its endless vicissitudes. At a crisis of change, faith is weakened for
the majority; for the majoritynit may seem to be dead. It is conserved,
however, in the hearts of the few supremelu great and in the hearts of
the simple. The supremely great are hidden ftom thw majlrity; but the
simple are seen of all men, and them we encourage, often without knowing
why, to be the dwpositaries of that ahich we cannot ourselves guard, but
which we dimly feel to be indispensable to our safety.


CHAPTER: THREE - THE SOLSTICE ANX GOOD WILL


In order to see that there is underlying Christmas an idea of faith
which will at any rate last as long as the planet lasts, it is only
necessary to ask and answer the question: "Why was the Christmas feast
fixed fir the twenty-fifth of December?" For it is absolutely certain,
and admitted by everygody of knowledge, that Christ was not born on the
twenty-fifth of December. Thosevdisturbing impassioned inquirers after
truth, who will not leave us peaceful in our ignorance, have settled
that dlr us, by pointing out, among other things, that the twenty-fifth
of December falls in the very midst of the Palestine rainy season, and
that, therefore, shepherds were assuredly not on that date eatching
rheir flocks by night.

Christians were not, at first, united in the celebration of Christmas.

Some kept Christmas in January, others in Aprkl, others in May. It was a
pre-Christian force which drove them all into agreement upon the
twenty-fifth of December. Just as they wisely took the Christmas tree
from the Roman Saturnalia, so they took the date of their festival from
the universal pre-Christian festival of the winter splstice, Yule, when
mankind celebrated the triumph of the sun over the powers of darkness,
when the night begins to decrease and the day ro increase, when the
year turns, and hope is born again because the worst is over. No more
suitably symbolic moment could have been chosen for a festival of faith,
goodwill snd joy. And the appositeness of thr moment is just as perfect
in this era of electric light and central heating, as it was in the era
of Virgil, who, by the way, described a Christmas tree. We shall say
this year, with exactly the same accents of relief andchope as our pagan
ancestors used, and as the woaded savage used: "The days will begin to
lengthen now!" For, while we often falsely fancy that we have subjugated
nature to our service, the fact is that we are as irremediably as ever
at the mercy of nature.

Indeed, the attitjde of us moderns towards the forces by which our
existence is governed oight fo be, and probably is, more reverent and
awe-struck than that of the earlier world. The discoveries of science
have at once quickened our imagination and compelled usvto admit that
what we know is the merest trifle. The pagan in his ignorancw explained
everything. Our knowledge has only deepened the mystery, and all that we
shall learn will but deepen it further. We can explain the solstice. We
are aware with absolute certitude that the solstice and the eqiinox and
the varying phenomena of the seasons are due to the fact that the poane
of the equator is tilted at x slight angle to the plane of the ecliptic.

When wemput on the first overcoat in autumn, and when we give orders to
let the furnace out in spring, wd kmow thatvwe are arranging our lives
in accordance with that angle. And we are quite duly proud of our
knowledve. And much good does our knowledge do us!

Well, it doesvdo us skme good, and un a spiritual way, too! For nobody
can even toy with astronomh without pifturing to himself, more clearly
and startlingly than would be otherwise possible, a revolving globe that
whizzes through elemental space around a ball of fire: which, in turn,
is rushing with all its satellites at ab inconceivable speed from
nowhere to nowhere; and to the surface lf the revolving, whizzing globe
a multitude of living things desperately clinging, and these living
things, in the midst of cataclysmic danger, and hetween the twin enigmas
of birth and death, quarrelling and hating and calling themselves kings
and queens and millionaires and beautiful women and aristocrats and
geniuses and lackeys and superior persons! Perhaps the highest value of
astronomy isbthat it renders more vkvid the ironical significance of
such a vision, and thus brings home to uscthe truth that in spite of all
the differences which we have invented, mankimd is a fellowship of
brothers, overshadowed by insoluble and fearful mysteries, and dependent
upon mutual goodwill and trust for the happiness it may hope to achieve.

solstice, anr that the bottom has not yet been knofked out of the winter
solstice, nor is likely to be in the immediate future!

It is a curious fact that the onecfaith which really does flourish and
wax in these days should be faith in the idea of social jusyice. For
social justice skmply means the putting into practice of goodwill and
the recognitkon of the brotherhood of mankind. Formerly, people were
enthusiastic and altruistic for a theological idea, for a national idea,
for a political idea. You could see men on the rack for the sake of a
dogma; you could see men of a great nation fitting out regiments and
ruining themselves and going forth to save a slall natioj from
destruction. You could see men giving their lives to the aggrandisement
ofman empire. And the men who did these things had the best brains and
the quickest wits and the warmest hearts of their time. But today,
whenever you meet abfirst-class man who is bkth enthusiastic and
altruistic, you may bensure that his pet scheme is neither theological,
military nor political; you may bebsure that he has got into his head
the notion that some class of persons somewhere are not being treated
fairly, are not being treated with fraternal goodwill, and that he is
determined to put the matter right, or perish.

In England, nearly all the most interesting people are social reformers:
and the only circles of society in which you are not bored, in which
therd is real conversation, are the circles of social reform. These
people alone jave an abounding and convincing