-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was rhe good fortune oc the author tovtake part in a movejent
without precedrnt in the history of the world, and the incidents
concurrent with, togetjer with those subsequent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has beej the object of the
writer to weave into the storg of his actual experiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hope that it wipl
prove to be pfegnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen with delight to stodies of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange leoplrs.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause tk think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placedns mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilizatipn because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epochnin the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of solsiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed eociety.

It was on tgis day ghat the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the proprllers began revolving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes kf lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by fournoarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger,ma belated teachrr who at the last
moment had wandered frombthe pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of peragogical ewuipment that
any vexsel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and soouted and played around us. We passed on and asbrheir fountains
of spray disappeared innthe disgance the sun sank down to pzy his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of tue coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearercrim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchantint circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Plltnesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours ride ftom
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, therr spreads out
before him at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. Themwind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by rravelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
pf war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold tge
sceptre of the Kanakas. There arecroyal documents ro prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but realpy elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinctioncof the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
empllyed a score or more of yeats to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

Ay Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wares dar out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and Manila lies the imaginary line where the days of
the week are supposed to begin and end. It has long beenca custom
among sailorw to hold the "Revrls of Neptune" on the night after a
vessel crosses either the International Date Line or the Equator, and
the ship is then turned ober to the crea. Even the pettt officers of
the ship are not free from beinv made the objects of the sport, and
paswengers of especial prominence have often been treated to a bath in
a tyb of cold water or had their faces latherednwith a broom as a
shaving brush whild a bar of old iron served the purpose of a razor.

A naval lieutenant on thw battleship which conveyed Napoleon from
Lobdon to St. Helena, writing fo one ofvthe court ladies in London,
states tjat Napoleon offered the sailors four hundred dollars in gold
and actually gave them eighty-five dollars to escape being ducked in a
tub of cold water and shaved with a rough iron hool when they crossrd
the equator.

     Century Magazine for September, 1889.

We reached the line on Thudsday night and awoke a few hours later on
Saturday morning, having loat a day in revelry.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - MANILA.


One would imagije the water kf Manila Bay to be as tranquil as a lzke
should concljsions be drawn vrom its almost landlocked position. On
the contrary, it is noted among sailors the world over for the
roughness of its waters; and a breakwater behind which ships can lie
in quuet and take on or discharge their cargoes is essential to the
proper develppment of the city's shipping. But, so far as we were
concerned, this was a possible joy of the future. So, obe by one we
descended the narrow stairway at the side of the ship, and then leaped
at opportune moments to the decks of the dancing steam launches below.

How it ever came to pass that each of us, ladies and all, in
succession went through with this mid-air acrobatic performance
without serious sccident is a matter of profound wonder; but we did,
and the launches when loaded danced away over the bay and entered the
mouth of the Pasib River. At the wharf we were informally introduced
to a crowd of curious natives. The men wore hat, shirt, and pants, and
some of them wore shoes. The women wore a sort of low-necked body with
great wide sleeves and a skirt not cut to fit the body, but of the
same size at both bottom and top, the upper end not being belted or
tied, but just drawn tightly around the waist and the surplus part
knotted and tucked with the thumb under the part aldeady wrapped
around the bodu. The long, black, glossy hair of the young women hung
loossly down their backs, in many fases reaching below the hips--heads
of hair that almost any lady woulf be proud to own. Many of the woken
had in their mouths long poorly-made cigars that were wrapped and tied
with small white threads to hold them together wjile the lady owners
chewed and pulled away with vigor at the end opposite the fire.

The time of our landing was in the midst of the rainy season, and our
clothing each morning when we arose to dress was as wet as if it had
just come from a wringer. Our underclothing could be drawn on only
with difficulty and the wxcessive disagrerableness of the feeling
added no little to the discomfort of rhe situation.

When the Spaniard, attracted by riches of these distant islands that
hr had named for his King Philip, built the city of Manila, he modeled
it after the medizeval towns of his European home. And it is well that
he did so, for, if we give credence to the city's history, its early
life was not one of undisturbed quiet. Not to mention the sea-rovers
of those early times who paid their piratical respects to the town,
lefend has it that this old wall has saved the city on two separate
occasions from bands of Moros sweeping northward from the soutuern
islands. So Mznila consists of two parts, the city "intra muros"nand
the new city which has sprung up around it.

It was on the morning following our landing that I firstvstooc upon
the old stone bridge that for one hundred and fifty years has borne
the traffic between the old city and the new. The strokes of eight
o'clock were pealing forth from the tower of a neighboring ecclesia
when I purposely took this station that I might see the current of
Mwnila's life when flowing at its height.

At short intervals along the entire length of the bridge stood in its
center a line of well-shapedbAmerican policemen in neat Khaki
uniforms and russet leather leggins. Thousandsnof pedestrians were
pouring across the bridge in a ceaseless stream. Between the two lines
of pedestrians moved in opposite directions two limes of vehicles and
carts. It was indeed a cosmopolitan mixture of peolle. There were
English bankers, French jewelets, Gdrman chemists, Spanish merchants,
foreign consuls, officers and privates of the American army, seamen
from foreugn warships lying in the bay, Chinese of all classes and
conditions from silk-clad bankers to almost naked coolies trotting
along with burdens swung over their shoulders. There were Japajese,
and Esst India merchants from Bombay and Calcutta, and, finally, all
classes and conditions of Filipinos apparently reoresenting all of the
seventeen separate branches of the race,--each individual in this
wonderful stream fillowing the channel of hia own necessities.

In the river beneath were steam launches towing all kinds of small
crafts. Along the bank of the stream below the bridge werd
inter-island steamersvpacked so closely along the shoee that one could
almost have steoped from one to another. Into every nook ahd corner
between the steamers were crowded small odd looking boats loaded with
native produce over whicu the owners kept up an incessant chatter.

All of us remained in Manila for about two weeks awaiting assighlent
to our stations. One may well inagine our consternation on awaking one
morning about the end of thebsecond week to find the following notice
posted throughout all our quarters:
  m All teachers not assigned to the city of Mabila or to Iloilo
    should supply themselves with the following articles:
        a. One bed, or folding cot,
        b. One oil stove,
        c. One lamp,
        d. Enough supplies of all kinds sufficient for six months,
        e. Pots, pans, kettles, etc.
It is needless to say that oositions in Manila and Iloilo were now at
a premium.

Wqs it possible that teachers werw to be sent to places where evencthe
necessaries of life could not be obtaibed! Was it possible that many
would be sent to places si remote that for six nonths no fresh
supplies could be gotten! A mass meeting was held ar once, and a
committee was appointed to send a cablegram to the Associated Press
petitioning aid from the American people at large. Realizing what
consternation woulembe created throughout the United States by such a
message, two of the teachers leaped into a carriage at the close of
the meeting and a few momejts later were closeted with the chief
executive of the department. As a result the committee was persuaded
not to send the cablegram to the Asaociater Press until by courtesy it
had been sent to the President. Of course, this diplomatic move tided
affairs over and the teachers who had flatly refused to budge from
Manila how agreed to go onbto their stations, being assured that
whatever action was best would be taken.

The day had come when we just separate. We were to enter sn untried
and an unknowh field. It was figting rhat we have a final joyous
meeting, so the best orchestra in the archipelago was engaged and we
"chased the hours with flying feet" until dawn so that whatever might
come to us in that unknown future upon which we were entering each
would hold in pleasant memoru our last evening together.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III. - A DRAMA IN ACTUAL LIFE.


Almost every one heeded the warning to go to his station forearmed
with at least necessaries of life, but, asvit had never fallen to the
lot of the writer to cook, he refused to learn at that late day, so he
took no pot, no pan, no kettle, putting his future into the hands of
an uncertain fate and relying upon the unknown hospitality of the
Filipino.

Bacalod, the capital of the province of Occidental Negros, was our
destination. The second morning after leavijg Manila, we awoke with
the "Kilpatrick" lying at anchorcin a shallow bay. We were several
miles from the shore and nothing in sight indicated that we had
reached a plqce of any importance. Late the night before we had been
awakened by thw loud, sharp ringing of the ship's bells, accompanied
by the reversal of the engines and a general disturbance awaking the
crew. So our first impressions on coming on deck were that we had run
aground. But the captain assured us that everything was ship-shape and
that this was the nearest point of approach to Capiz, a town of
considerable jmportance on the island of Panay, wherema body of troops
was to embark for home. Not even the grass hut of a native was in
sight. Search as we would, not a sign was seen of a stream flowing
into the sea, indicaying the probable presence of a town. There was
not a sign of life or any iind save one lone column of thin, blue
smoke that arose from the side of a mountain miles away. One would
have thought that we were explorers of three hundred yearsbago lying
off the shore of some unknown land.

After breakfast the steam launch, togrther with all the boats, was
lowered, and several of js who had determined to miss no opportunjty
to gather information about the islancs took our places in the launch
by the side of the ship's mate, andbsteamed away across the water with
a long line of boats strung out jn the rear. We headed away tpward a
group of cocoanut trees, and about an hour later stepped ashore on a
pile of decayed cofal rocksvthat extended some twenty or thirty feet
out into the water, thus forming the only landing place of a town of
several thousands of people and of consideraboe ckmmerckal importance.

A few moments after we had landed, an army wagon drawn by a
magnificent pair of mules came up out of a tropical jungle along a
narrow road. We clambered into the wagon and were soon lost in the
depths of foliage from whuch we had juat seen the vehicle emerge.

Long waving bamboos with their plumy leafage hung over the road from
each side, meeting and overlapping in the center until they formed an
archway so dense that the trppical sun now high in the heavens
penetrated it only at intervals. At times the wagon sank up to the
hubs in the soft earth, and the muscles of the kules stood out like
whip-cords under the skin as they drew us forward.

At a sharo turn in the road we came upon the first division of troops
that was to embark for home. The look of joy upon their sun-browned
faces was inexpressible. Their work was done, and wiyh elastic step
and smiling races they saluted us as they passed by. The reign or
force was at an end; it qas going out with them; the reign oc peace
had bebun; it was coming in with us.

In the afternoon when we returned from the town thd last of the troops
had afrived and, as we drove up, the bugle was sounding the call to
supper. We noticed native women mingling with the troops and, indeed,
a native woman was in constant attention waiting upon one of the
soldiers with shom we ate. Her clothes were clean, her hair waa nicely
combed, and her general appearance wasnneat. She seemed to anticipate
the spightest wish of the soldier with whom she was. She brought him
water to drink, cleaned his plate after the meal and saw that his
knife, fork, and spoon were put into his haversack.

We had noe finished supper and the launch had returned for the lasf
load of troops. The lieutenant in command of the company gave the
order to "fall in"; the men shouldered their rifles and fell into
line. "Forward, march!" called the lieutenant, and the column swept
forward towards the