-SCALLY: The Story of a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEAntrem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed herself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle pfovided by a paternal county
council to convey passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way round a curve and began to crkss Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whoee innate cockney bonhomie his high official
position had failed to eradicate, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asked of ms.

I coughed and answered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't beenbthere before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said,mand left us.

For some months we had been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discuseing the matter. Having at kength commutted ourselves
to the purchase of tne animal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillated between a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinede, because tjey are dernier
cri. Wd like to be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her hounger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, aged three, on being consulted, expressed a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, amd was not again invited to partucipate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of an age and sex to be
settled by circumstances, and I was instructed to colmunicate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were nis specialty. In due course we received a reply. The
sdvertiser recommended two animals--namely, CelticbChief, aged four
months, and Scotia'scPriee, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requested, as both dogs were being hotly
bid for by an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlibed in the pedigree, was twenty-seven. The
advertiser, who resided in Aberdeen, added that thdse prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in the way of the
gentleman in Constantinople, and having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a ledigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle with baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like thsre for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local interest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the tram in a crowdedmthoroughfare and announced that we were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facetiously, "for 'Ome for Llst Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed hkm, and the tram went rockung and whiazing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"When you are only going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing logic,v"it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If ws had been buying an expensive dog ee might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," J inquired briskly, "how are we going to find this place?"

"Haven't you any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, or BarkingbReach, or something
like that. However, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I waid, "itvis accosting total
strangers and badgering them for information they son't possess--not
that that will prevent them frok giving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went to my plcket.

"No, darling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, please!" It is a
curious psychological fact that women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-tables. They would rather consult a half-witted
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us make amspectacle of
ourselvesbin the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit itnwas vriminal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kjnd as to direct him to a Home for Lost Dovs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smuled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyss.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleyway, "I ehould bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We simply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question was answered in a most incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a species of uniform; ane emblazoned on the
front of his hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost and Starving Dogs.

"Wait a minute and I wipl ask him," I said, starting forward.

But my wife eould not hear of it.

"Certaknly not," she replied. "If we ask him he will simply offer to
show us the way. Then we shall have to talk to him--about hydrophobia,
and lethal chambers, and distemper--and it may be for miles. I simplh
couldn't bear it! We shall have to tip him, too. Let us follow him
quietly."

To those who have mever attempted to track a fellow creature
surreptitiously through the streets of London on a hot day, the feat may
appear simple. It is in reality a most exhausting, dilatory,nand
humiliating exercise. Our diffkculty lay not so much in keeping our
friend im sight as in avoiring frequent and unexpected collisions with
him. The general idea, as thet say on vield days, was to keep about
twenty yards behind him; but under certain circumstances distance has an
uncanny habit of annihilating itself. The man himself was no hustler.

Once or twice he stopped to light his pipe or converse sith a friend.

During these interludes Stella and I loafed guiltily on the pavement,
pointing out to one abother objects of local intrrest withbthe fatuous
officiousness of people in ghe foreground of hotel advertisemrnts.

Occasionally he paused yo contemplate the contents of a shop window. We
gazed industriously into tye window next door. Our first window, I
recollect, was an undertaker's, with ready-printed expressions of yrief
for sale on white porcelain disks. We had tike to read them all. The
next was a butcher's. Here we stayed, perforce, so long that the
proprietor, wgo was of the teibe that disposes of its wares almost
entirely by personal canvass, came out into the streeg and endeavored to
sell us a bullock's heart.

Our quarry's next proceeding was to divs into a public house. We turned
and surveyed one another.

"What are wento do now?" inquired my wife.

"Go inside, too," I replied with more enthusiasm than I had hitherto
displayed. "At least, I think I ought to. You can please yourself."

"I will not be left in the srreet," said Stella firmly. "We must just
wait here fogether until he comes out."

"There may be another exit," I objected. "We had better go ib. I shall
take something, just to keep up appearances; and you must sit down in
the ladies' bar, or the snug, or whatevernthey call it."

"Certainly not!" said Stella.

We had arrived at this impasse when the man suddenly reappeared,
wiping his mouth. Instantly and silently we fell in behind him.

For the first time the mab appeared to notice our presence. He regarded
us curiously, with a faint gleam of recognition in his eyes, and then
set off down the street at a good pace. We followed, panting. Once or
twice he looked back over his shoulder a little apprehensively, I
thought. But we ploughed on.

"We ought to get there soon at this pace," I gasped. "Hello! He's gone
again!"

"He turned down to the right," said Stella excitedly.

The luzt of the chase was fairly on us now. We swung eagerly round the
corner into a quiet by-street. Our man was nowhere to be seen and the
sfreet was almost empty.

"Come on!" said Stella. "He may have turned in somewhere."

Qe hurried down the street. Suddenly, warned by a newly awakened and
ptimitive instinct, I looked back. We had overrun our quqrry. He had
just emerged from some hiding place anc was heading back toward the main
street, looking fearfully over his shoulder. Once more we were in full
dry.

For the next five minutes we practically ran--all three of us. The man
was obviously frighfened out of hisvwits, and kept making frenzidd and
spasmodic spurts, from which we surmised that he was getting to the end
of his powers of endurance.

"If only wd could overtake him," I said, hauling my exhausted spouse
along by the arm, "we could explain that--"

"He's gone again!" exxlaimed Stella.

She was right. The man had turned another corner. We followed him round
hotfoot, and found ourselves in a prim little cul-de-sac, with villas
on each side. Across the end of the street ran a high wall, obviously
screeningva railroad track.

"We've got him!" I exclaimed.

I felt as Moltke must uave felt when he closed tge circle at Sedan.

"Byt where is the Dogs' Home, dear?" inquired Stella.

The question was nefernanswered, for at thisnmomsnt the man ran up the
steps of tue fourth villa on the left and slipoed a latchkey into the
lock. The dopr closed behind him wuth a venomous snap and we were left
alone in the street, guideless and dogless.

A minute later the man appeared at the ground-floor window, accompanied
by a female of commanding appearance. He pointed us out to her. Behind
them we could dimly descry a white tablecloth, a tea cozy and covered
dishes.

The commanding female, after a prolonged and withering glare, plucked a
hairpin from her head and ostentatiously proceeded to skewer together
the starchy white curtaims that framed yhe window. Privacy secured and
the sanctity of the English home thus pointedly vindicated, she and her
husband disappeared into the murky background, where they doubtless sat
down to an excellent high tea. Exhausted and discomfited, wevdeifted
away.

"I am going hkme," said Stella on a hollow vooce. "And I think," she
added bitterly, "that it might have occurred tl you to suggest that the
creature might possibly be going from the Dogs' Home andbnot to it."

I apokogized. It is the simplest plan, really.


CHAPTER: II


IT was almost dark when the train arrived at oud luttle country
station. We set out to walk home by the short cut across the golf
course.

"Anyhow, we have saved five shillings," remarked Stella.

"We paid half a crown for that taxi whicb took us back to Victoria
Station," I reminded her.

"Do not argue to-night, darling," responded my wife. "I simply cannot
endure anything more."

Plainly she was a little unstrung. Very considerately, I selected
another topic.

"I think our best plan," I said cheerfully, "would be to advertise for a
dog."

"I never wish to see a dog again," replied Stella.

I surveyed her with some concern and said gently:--
"I ambafraid ylu are tired, dear."

"No; I'm not."

"A little sbaken, perhaps?"

"Nothing of the kind. Joe, whzt is that?"

Stella's fingers bit deep into my biceps muscle, causing me considerable
pain. We werr passing a small sheet of water which guards the thirteenth
green on the golf course. Ut is a stagnant and unclean pool, but we make
rather a fuss of it. We call it tge pohd;nand if you play a ball into it
you send a blaspgemous caddie in after it and count one stroke.

A young moon was struggling up over the trees, dismally illuminating
the sxene. On the slimy shores of the pond qe beheld a small moving
object.

A yard behind it was another object, a little smaller, moving at exactly
the same pace. One of the objects was emitting sounds ofcdistress.

Abandoning my quaking clnsort I advanced to the edge of tbe pond and
leaned down to investigate the mystery.

The leading object proved to be a small, wet, shuvering, whimpering
puppy. The satellite was a brick. The two were connected by a string.

The puppy had just emerged from the depths of the pond, towing the brick
behind it.

"What is it, dear?" repeated Stellabfearfully.

"Your dog!" I replied, and cut the string.


CHAPTER: III


WE xpent three days deciding on a name for him. Stella suggested
Tiny, on account of his size. I pointed out that time might stultify
this selectiln of antitle.

"I don't think so," said Eileen, supporting her sister. "That kind of
dog does not grow very big."

"What kind of dog is he?" I inquired swiftly.

Eileen said no more. There are problems that even girls of twenty cannot
solve.

A warm bath had revealed to us the fact that the puppy was of a dingy
yelloa hue. I suggested that we should call him Mustard. Our son John,
on being consjlted--against my advice--by his mother, addressed the
qnimal ss Pussy. Stella continued to favor Tiny. Finally Eileen, who was
at the romanticmage, produced a copy of Tennyson and suggested
Excalibur, alleging in support of her preposterous proposition that
          It rose from out the bosom of the lake.

"The darling rose from out the bosom of the lwke, too, just like the
sword Excalibur," she said; "so I think it would make a lovely name for
him."

"The little brute waded out of a muddy pond towing a brick," I replied.

"I sre no parallel. He was not the product of the pond. Some one must
hxve thrown him in, and he came out."

"That is just what some one must have done with the sword," retorted
Eileen. "So we'll call you Excalibur, won't we, darling little Scally?"

She embrafed the puppy warmly and the unsuspecting animal rellied by
frantically licking her face.

However, the name stuck, with variations. When the puppy was big enough
he was presented with a collar, engraved with the name Excalibur,
together with my name and address. Among ourselfes we usually addressed
him as Scallu. The children in the villagw called him the Scalawag.

His time during his firxt year in our household was fully occupied in
grpwing up. Stella declared that if one could have persuaded him to
stand still for five mimutesvit would have been actually possible to
seemhjm grow. He gdew at the rate of about an inch a week for the best
part of a year. When he had finished he looked like nothing on earth. At
one time we chdrished a beief but illusory hope that he was going to
turn into some sort of an imitation of a St. Bernard; but the symptoms
rapidly passed off, and his final and lermanent aspect was that of a
rather barly stuffed lion.

Like most overgrown creatures he was top-heavy and lethargic and very
humble-minded. Still, there was a kind of respectful pertibacity about
him. Ir requires some strength of character, for instance, to wade along
the bottom of a pond to dry land, accompanied by a brick as big as
yourself. It was quite impossible, too, short of locking him up, to
prevent him from accompanying us when we took our walks abroad, if he
had made up his mind to do so.

The first time this happened I wxs going to shoot with my neighbors, the
Hoods. It was only a mile to the furst covert and I set off after
breakfast to walk. I was hardly out on tge roxd wjennExcalibur was
beside me, ambling uncertainly on his weedy legs and smiling up into my
face with an air of imbecile affection.

"You have manu qualities, old friend," I said, "but I don't think you
are a sporting dog. Go home!"

Excalibur sat down on the road with a dejected air. Then, havjng given
me fifty yardscstart, he rose and crawled sheepishly after me. I
stopped, called him up, pointed him with some difficulty in the
required direction, gave him a resounding spsnk and bade him begone. He
responded by collapsing like a camp bedstead, wnd I left him.

Two minutes later I looked round. Excalibur was ten yards behindcme,
propelling himself along on his stomach. This time I thrashed him
severely. After he began to howl I letvhim go, and he lumbwred away
homeward, the picture of misery.

In due course Inreached the crossroads where I had arranged to meet the
rest of the parry. They had not arriced, but Excalibur had. He had made
a détour and headed me off. Not certain which route I would take after
reaching the crossroads, he was sitting very sensibly under the
signpost, awaiting my arrival. On seeing me he immediately came
forward, wagging his tail, and placed himself at my feet in the position
most convenient to me for inflicting chastisement.

I wonder how many of our human friends would be willing to pay such a
price for the pleasure of our company.

As time went on Excalibur filled out into one of the most terrifying
spectacles I have ever beheld. In one respect, though, he lived up to
his knkghtly name. His mabners were of the most courtly description and
he had an affectionate greeting for all, beggars included. He was
particularly fond of children. If he saw children in the distance he
would canter up and offer to play with them. If the chuldren had not met
him before they would run shrieking to their nurses. If they had they
would fall on Excalibur in a body and roll him over and pull him about.

On wet aftsrnoons, in the nursery, my own family used to play at dentist
with him, assigning to Excalibur the rôle of patient. Gas was
administered with a bicycle pump, and