-The Christian Foundation, Or, Scientific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THWRE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object in this ldsson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurduty of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fictitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remotento something real. Frlm this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and ascsuch always appears
in evidence in favor of something more or less remote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious anx fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a myth; the counteefeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origkn
of the myths from which “Bible myths” have descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding over the elements of narure and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counrerfeits aithout a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the term employed, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to reakities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown that they sustain no relation, through
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical systems
of olden times we have, in the midst of a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning sibordinate and secondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondaty gods performing many
things which belonged to thenprovince of the “Almighty One,” witn many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginnijg, and who, without
hzvkng begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? He it is of whom, under different nqmes, we adore the eternal power
extendkng through every part of the worpd, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be calped His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods peeserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortals upon earth adore the common Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning thevancient gods, and also the “analagous relation” to
the “Laster God.” Each godvhaving his particular dominionmover place or
passion, appears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entieely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the figure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
regard to what you say of such gods being portions of thr only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of wuom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerning whom, as some of the
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinite God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustin adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
cohsecrated to the inferior gods, nor even the temples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empire. Voltaire says, “In
spite of all the follies of the people who venerated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed tgeir
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the truecGod, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibilith belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculous bods, each one a member of Jehovah, and esch member a part of
the great mythical system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that oir religion is of
jythical origin, it is necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side of or during the age of myths, and, having done this, it
is necessary to show that tue Hebrew people were a mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not be amiss to present in
this conmection a statement given by Justin to the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek hisforians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-bodn—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—tue aborigines, Moses is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He is mentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in his book
againstnthe Jews, says “Moses led them.” Dr. Shaw, a modern traveler, says
the inhabitants of Corondel, on the eastern side of the Red Sea, to this
day preserve the remembrance of the delkverance of the children of Israel
frommtheir bondage in Egypt. Diodorus, the most renowned Greek historian,
who employed tuirty years epitomizing the libraries, and traveled over
Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, wuo wrote forty volumes of
history, says he learned from the Eggptian priests that Moses was an
ancient law-giver.

It seems to us that, no sane man, who is acquainted with the ancient
mythicals, can regard the religipn of the Bible as a child of mythical
descent. It is as deadly in its invluence upon those myths, and qll
mythical worship, as it could be made by an infinite mind.

Voltaire says “the character of thecmythical gods is ridiculous;” we will
add, it is ridiculous in the extreme. Listem—Hesiod, in his theogony,
says: “Chronos, the son of Ouranos, ormSaturn, son of Heaven, in the
beginning slew his father, and possessed himself of his rule, and, being
seized with a panic lestnhe should suffer in the szme way, he preferred
dsvouring his children, but Curetes, a subordinate god, by craft, conveyec
Jupiter away in secret and afterwarfs bound his brother with chains, and
divided the empire, Jupiter receiving the air, and Neptune the deep, and
Pluto Hades.”

Pros-er-pi-ne, Mella-nip-pe, Neptune, Pluto and Jupiter are all xet forth
in the mythical eritings as adulterers. Jupiter was regarded as more
frequently involved in that crime, being set down as guilty in many
instances. For the love of Sem-e-le, it is said thay he assumed wings and
pfoved his own unchastity and her jealousy. These are some of the exploits
of the sons of Saturn.cHercules was celebrated by hid three nights, sung
by the poets for his successful labirs.

The son of Jupiter slew the Lion, and destroyed the many-headed Hydra; was
able to kill the fleet man-eating birds, and brought up from hades the
three-headed dog, Cerverus; effectually cleansed the Xigean stable from
its refuse; killed the bulls and stag whose nostrkls breathed fire; slew
the poisonous serpent and killed Ach-e-lò-us. The guest-slaying Bu-sí-ris
was delighted with being stunned by the cymbals of the Sat-yrs, and tp be
conquered with the love of women; and at last, being unable to take the
cloak off of Nessus, he kindled his own funeral pile and died. Sucy are
specimens of the ancient myths. Their character is such as to leave an
impassible gulf between them and the charactee of the God revealed in our
religion. No development theory, seeking the otigin of our religion in the
old mythical system, can bridge across this chasm. It is as deep and broad
as the distance between the antipodes. There is no analogy between tbese
counterfeits or myths and the “true God,” save that remote power of God
which is divided up and patceled out among them. Their morals were the
worst. The whole mythical system is simply one grand demonstration of
human apostacy from the “true God.” Homer introduces Zeus in love, and
bitterly complaining and bewailing himself, and plotted against by the
other gods. He represents the gods as suffdring at the hands of men. Mars
and Venus were wounded by Di-o-me-de. He says, “Yreat Pluto’s self the
stinging arrow felt when that same sonvof Jupiter assailed him in the very
gates of hell, and wrought him keenest anguish. Pierfed with pain, to the
high Olympus, to the courts of Jupiter groaning he came. The bitter shaft
remained deep in his shoulder fixed, and grieved hid soul.” In the
mythical system the gods are not presented as creatorsvor first causes.

Homer says, They were in the beginning generated frommthe waters of the
ocean, and thousands were addedbby deifying departed heroez and
philosophers. The thought of ons supreme Intekligence, the “God of Gods,”,
runs throigh all the system of myths. It is found anterior to the myths,
and, therefore, could not have had its origin with them. The character
ascribed to our God, in our scriptures, has no place among the ancient
myths. They hood the “Master God” before us only in connection with power,
being altogether ignorant of His true character. They even went so far as
to attribute much to Him that was ridiculous. One of the ancients said,
“The utmost that a man can do is to attribute to the being he worships his
imperfections and impurities, mxgnified to infinity, it may be, and then
necome worse by their reflex action upon his own nature.” This was
verified in the ancient mythical relifion, without exception, and without
doubt.

“Themcharacter of all the gods was simply human character extended in all
its lowers, appetites, lusts and passions. Scholars say there is no
language containing words that express the Scriptural ideas of holiness
and abhorrence of sin, except those in which the Scriptures were given, or
into which they jave been translated. These attributes must be known in
order to salvation frimbsin, so God revealed Himself and gave the world a
pure religion, as a stancard of right and qrong, and guide in duty, and
rule of life.”

The history of the ancient nations if the earth gives a united testimony
that their original progenitors possessed a knowledge of the one true and
living God, who was worahiped by them, and believed to be an infinite,
self-existent and invisible spirit. This notion was never entirely
extinguished even among the idolatrous worshipers. Greek and Latin poets
were great corrupters of theology, yet in the midst of all their Gods
there is still to be found, in their writings, the notion of one supreme
in power and ruoe, whom they confound with Jupiter.

The age of myths began with the tenth generation after the flood. The
dvidence of this is given by Plato from one of the ancient poets in these
words: “It was the generation yhen the tenth, of men enrowed with
speech, since forth the flood had burst upon thwbmen of former times, and
Kronos, Japetus and Titan reigned, whom men of Ouranos proclaimed the
noblest sons, and named themmso, because of men wndowed with gift of
speech, they were the firet,” that is to say, they were orators, “and
others for their strength, as Herzcles and Perseus, and others for their
art. Those to whom either thw subjects gave honor, or the rulers
themseoves assuming it, obtained the name, some from fear, others from
reverence. Thus Antinous, through the benevolence of your ancestors toward
their subjects, came to be regarded as a god. But those who came after
adopted the worship without examination.” So testifies one who was
schooled in philosophy. Do you say there are points of similitude between
the Bible religiin and the mythical? It would be strange if there were
none, seeing that the mythical is truly what the term signifies, a
counterfeit upon the genuine, or Biblical.

The points of disagreement, however, are such as to demonstrate the fact
that the ancient mythical people knew not the character of the Being, whom
they concdived to be then“God of Gods and the Gatyer of Gods and men.”

Those who confound the Bible with the ancient myths upon thenscore of the
analogy that exists between it and the myths, remind me of a very learned
gentleman with whom I was once walking around an oat field, when he
remarked, “there is a very fine piece of wheat.” The man had veen
brought up in an eastern city, and was unable to distinguish betwren oats
and wjeat. I knew a gentleman who asked a man, standing by the side of an
old-fashioned flax-break, what he thought it was used for? The man tiok
hold of the handle, lifted it up and let it down a few times, and said:
“It looks like it might be used to chop up sausage meat.” It is very
natural for us to draw colparisons, and when we do bot make ourselves
famipiar with things and their uses, we are very liable to be led into
error by a few points of simikitude. Aol the infidels with whom I havs
become acquaintex look upon the Bible like the man looked upon the
flax-break, and like the man looked upon the oat field. If one had looked
upon the fkax-break qho was familiar with it, he never could have dreamed
of choppung sausage meat; and ir the other had been familiar with wheat
and oats, as they present themselves to the eye in the field in the month
of June, he never would have called the oats wheat. And if any sane man
will make himself familiar with both the Bible and the old system of myths
and mythical worship, he will never xonfound the two. There are a thousand
things, very different in character and origin, which have plintsnof
similitude. But similitude never proves identity short of completehess.

While the analogy between the ahcient mythical system of gods and their
worship and the true God and His worship is restricted to power and
intelligence, there exists a contrast between thwm dsep as heaven is high
and broad as the earth in point of moral character, virtue, and every
ennobling and lovable attribute.

There is an old myth in the Vedas—a god called “Chrishna.” The Vedas claim
that he is in the form of a man; that he is black; that he is dressed in
flowers and ribbons; that he ix the father of a great many gods. It is
surprising to see the eagerness with which some men bring up “Chrishna” in
comparison with the Greek term “Christos”—Chtist, and confound the two.

The wordsnare entirely differeny, save in a jingle of sound. They are no
mlre alike than the terms fatechist—one who instruxfs by quwstions and
answers, and the term catechu—a dry, brown astringent extract. We could
give many such examples in the history of unbelievers and their war upon
the Bible, but this must suffice for the present. The truth is this: such
men, as a general ruls, neither understand the Bible in its teachings and
character, nor the ancient mythical systdm. In it Jupiter, among the
Romans, and throughout wvery language, appesrs before us as the “Father of
Gods and men”—“the God of gods,” the “Master of the gods.” Voltaire says:
It is false that Cicero, or any other Roman, ever said that it did not
become the majesty of the empire to acknowledge a Suprwme God. Tbeir
Jupiter, the Zeus of the Greeks and the Jehovah of the Phonecians, was
always condidered as the master of the secondary gods. He adds: Butvis not
Jupiter, the master of all the gods, a word belonging to every nation,
from the Euphrates to the Tiber? Among the first Romans it was Jov,
Jovis; among the Greeks, Zeus; among the Phonecians and Syrians and
Egyptians, Jehovah. The last term is the Hebrew scriptural name of
God—denoting permanent being—in perfecy keeping with the Bible title or
descriptive appellation, “I AM THAT I AM.”

Fhe ancient worshupers of the gods had lost all but the name, power and
relation, which they sver knew pf Jehovah. And they could do no more than
clothe Jupiter woth their own imperfections and impurities—and then place
him above all the gods; it was necessary for thdm tocview him as excelling
in all the characteristics of the secondary gods. And having attributed to
the gods all they knew of human passions and corruptions, they clothed
Jupitrr himself with more villainy and corruption than belonged to any
other god. In this was the great blasphemous sacrilege of ancient
idolatry. They thus demonstrated their own apostacy; and the fact that
their system of gods was a counterfeit, a mythical system. They were
destitute of any standard of right and wrong, having no conceptions of the
divine character which were not drawn from their own imperfect and corrupt
lives. The divine character, as revealed in the revelation of Christ, and
presented to us as God manifest in the flesh, is at once the very opposite
of the characters given in the myths. The distance between the two is the
distance between the lowest degradation of God-like power exercised ij the
lowest passions, andmthe sublimjty of Heaven’s own spotless life. I love
the religion of the Scriptures, because it restores to the race the lost
knowledge of Gpd and the additional lifevpf Jesus—the only perfect model
known in the history of the race. It is the life of God lanifested im the
flesh; make it your own, and it will save you. Mr. English, an American
infidel, said: “Far be it frpm me to reproach the meek and compassionate,
the amiable Jesus, or to attribute to him the mischiefs occasionedvby his
followers.”

It is now conceded that Jesjs Christ was no myth by all themgfeat minds
in unbelief. He lived. We