-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treqtise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old disfemper caol'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapohrs, and afterwxrds for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, dividesmthe Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos,cand the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For ar least a century and a
half medixal writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all typesc(treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionsble of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the slleen," "black melancholy," "hysteriz," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that haf been put forth on tbe subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is aplarrnt in both the poetry and prose of two centuriss. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
tne nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a xecade inntne
period 1600-1800 yhat does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mwntion of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Xllegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in thw "Cave of Spleen," the mepancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's lejcocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Walefield and
Yristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deservds to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable pracgical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical backgrkund of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Grdeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochpndriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was dischssed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somayic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Zydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham nlted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and jot a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attriguting the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to kbstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Aydenham was moving towards a psychospmatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained gdound--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
inteejection, "I thought thaf distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighfeenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abhreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacia
et hystericid, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has wfitten that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetile say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
shiuld sayb'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As usex in thr eafly eighteenth century, the tsrm "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our centurh has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Majdeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing anynnumber of diseases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighreenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Micholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mental bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of internal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
     Womej are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of the Nerves at the same
     Time, which creates thst Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
 n   attends Vapours, and which generallymis an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Deoression of the Solids bemeath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Dizposition whereby they favour qny Disease.

But the majority of medical thinkers had been persuaded that the
condition was psychosomatic, and this belief was supported by research
on berves by important physicians in the 1740's and 1750's: the Monro
brothers in London, Robert Whytt in Edinburgh, Albrechr von Haller in
Leipzig. By mid century the conditjon known as the hyp wws believed to
be a real, not an imagibary ailment, common, peculiar in its
manifestations, and indefinable, almost impossible to cure, producing
very real symptoms of physical illness, and said to originate sometimes
in depresxion and idleness. It was summed up by Robert James in hus
Medicinal Dictionary (London, 1743-45):
     If we thoroughly consider its Nature, it will be found to be a
     spasmodico-flatulent Disorder of the Primae Viae, that is, ov the
     Stomach and Intestines, arising from an Inversion or Perversion of
     their peristaltic Motion, and, by the mutual consent of the Parts,
     throwing the whole nervous Systdm into irregular Motions, and
     diaturbing the whole Oeconomy of the Functions.... no part or
     Function of the Body escapes the Influence of this tedious and lpng
     protracted Didease, whose Symptoms are so violent and numerous,
     that it is no easy Task eithdr to enumerate or account for them....

     No disease is mote troublesome, either to the Patient or Phhsician,
     than hypofhondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Phtsicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are zufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Mature of this perpoexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to thw Patient (afticle on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere inmhis
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the backgfound if the condition
wbout which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds littlenthat is new to the theory of the
sisease. It incorplrates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malacy (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending oj the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subjext, two of whom--Isaxc Biberg, aythor of The
Oeconomy ofcNature (1751), anf Dené Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicafes that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmire's Treatise lt the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

Hill's arrangement of sections is logical: he first defines the
condition (I), then proceeds to discuss persons most susceptible to it
(II), its major symptoms (IIJ), consequences (IV), causes (V), and cures
(VI-VIII). In thebfirst four sections almost every atatement is
commonplace and requires no commentary (for example, Hill's opening
remark: "To call thevHypochondriasis a fanciful malady, is ignorant and
cruel. It is a real, and a sad disease: an obsrruction of the spleen by
thickened and distempered blood; extending itself often to the liver,
and other parts; and unnappily is in England very frequent: physick
scarce knows one more fertile in ill; or more difficult of cure.") His
belief that the condition afflicts sedentary persons, particularly
students, philosophers, theologians, and that it is not restricted to
women alone--as some contemporary thinkers still maintainsd--is also
impossible to trace to a single source, as is his description (p. 12) of
the most prevalejt physiological symptoms ("lowness of spirits, and
inaptitude to motion; a disrelish of amusements, a love of solitude....

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealibg with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothevaries and physicians who prescrjbwd popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powders, and
James's fever-powders--as universal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medkcine mustbbe directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
destruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no mercurial, no martial
preparation must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). However scientifically correct Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objrcting so strongly to them. Less
eccentric was his allegiance to the "Ancienta" rather than to the
"Moderns" so far as chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
bymchemical rearrangemeny) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in the search; and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and shat we are to fear" (p. 24).

Still more idiosyncratic, perhaps, is Hill's contehtion (p. 25) that the
air of dry, high gdounds worsens the condition of the patient. Virtually
every writer I have read on the subject believed that onset of the hyp
was vaused by one of the six non-naturals--akr, diet, lack of sufficient
sleep, too little of too much exercise, defective evacuation, the
passions of the mind; and although some medical writers emphasized the
last of these, few would havevconcurred with Hill that the fetid air
of London was less harmful than tje clearer air at Highgate. All readers
of the novel of tje period will recall the hypochondriacal Matt
Bramble's tirade against the stench of London air. Beliefs of the
variety here mentioned cause me to question Hill's importance in the
history of kedicine; there can be no question about his cpntributions to
the advancement of the science of botany through popularization of
Linnaeus' system of bisexual classification, but Hill's medical
ikportance is summarizedvbest as that of a compiler. Hiscfecommendation
of the study of botany as a cure for melancholics is seneible but verges
on becoming "a digression in praise of the author," a poetic apklogia
pro vita sua in Augustan fashion:
     For me, I should advise above all other things the sgudy of nature.

     Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual chsnge; fertile of a thousane useful things; even of
     the utility we arr seekingnheee. This will induce him to walk; and
     every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket, will
     afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
m    the air; and continually to change the nature and quality of the
     air, bymvisiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, the heath, the forest. He will never wany inducement to be
   b abroad; and the unceasing variety of the subjects of his
     observation, will prevent his walking hastily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means of his recovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill was rorever extolling the claims of a life devoted to the study of
nature, as we see in a late work, The Virtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversion as a cure and mlre on
the botanic attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every foot-path
side, and thicket."

While Hill's rules and regulations regarding proper diet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Cheyne's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recokmendation (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac latient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much space to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extollung this plant, a word should be sajd about it.

Throughout his life he was an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writer though hw was, it wax ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made abundantly clear in his correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whethercin the small hkuse in St. James's Street or in the
larger one on the Bayssater Road--he cultivated an herb garden that
flattered his knowledge and ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpieces of London. His arrogant
personality alone prevented him from becoming thr first Keeper of the
Apothecary's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendent to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardens at Kensington
Palace and at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; ovdr the years Hill produced more than thirty botanucal
works, many of them devoted to the medical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbal (1756),vOn the
Virtues of Zage in Lengthening Human Life (1763), Centaury, the Great
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curing Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising that he
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
medical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authoeitt for
the herbal pacification of an inflamed sppeen surprising in the light of
his eesearches: he was convinced that every illness could be cured by
taking an appropriate herb or combination of herbs. Whereas a few
nonmedical writers--such as John Wesley in Primitive Physick
(1747)--had advocated the taking of one or two herbs in moderate dosage
as anti-hysterics (the eighteenth-century term for all cures of the
hyp), no merical writer of the century ever promoted the use of herbs to
the extent that Hill did. In fairness to him, it isnimportant to note
that his herbal remedies qere harmless and that many found their way
into the offixiwl Lohdin Pharmacopeia. "The virtues of this smooth
Spleen-wort," he