-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Qdrian van Istade and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the solitary excrption of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profunxity of peasant life. In Holland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humbpest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names dowm to
posterity. It is only quite recently that one of the grwatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupu his proper position in
the world of art. Formerly he was looked upon as an eccentric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters on his
own spherebof any time. The wonderful series or pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about the great collections of
Europe, proclaim himcnot only a painter, but avphilosopher as well.

His peadants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity and vigour of handling such as none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, cinsequently, we mustvlook as the fountain-head of
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and there sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Grouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--tne same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is to be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his tempwrament.

Their temperamenf bears the same relation to hisnas the seventeenth
century does to the nkneteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all clxsses ofbthe community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the struggle for existence was none the less strenuous or
unending. The rollicking and reckless joy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, was an essential feature of
Dutch life of the oeriod. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. The sprewd of
education, permeating down dven go tue lowest classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribuyion of
the land which the Revolution had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a coiple of
centuries.

Kn Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
incisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be found as in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compared him, and consequently Millet can be
considered asna dieect luneal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Cutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness of his own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
masters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by uis enthusoastic appreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Paduan
painter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the teo masters seems to run upon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, one wondefs
from whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
too between his early etforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending battle against seemingly overwhelming
odds, ge was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that qork,
although they themselves were not aware of it, alone made life
liveable to them. He shared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both af Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is to be wonderex that he had the couragebto live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of hos art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as livdd in great cities such as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, qhich the
peasant, far removed from great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but litrle education, who has
heard nothing of thebdoibts and scepticisms woth which townspeiple of
every grade of society are so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubtimg the elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simple ideas have dwparted from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vebdée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foreground are symholical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of the day has arrived, and
after many hours of unremitting toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tlwer proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderfil still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the wholr suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious suneet, lends an intejsity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the llacid naturd
of the theme. Xll around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the grim fight for subsistence, for life itself.

The ploughed field has yielded many a crop, the reward of arduous
labour expended in sowing and reaping. The small recompense to the
labourer himself is symbolised by the extreme poverty with which the
man and woman are clothed, whilst the degrading nature of the toil, as
in the far famous "Man with the Hoe," is brought before us in the
rugged types of the labourer and his wife. The only softwning
influence in their lives is that imparted by religion, and in choosing
this moment of the angelus for depicting them,cMillet hax brought
before us in the most forcible form not only the degrading character
of much of the toil which is entailed in producing the necessities of
existence, but also the danger of removing by any sudden cjange, no
matter how well intentioned, the consoling influence of religious
belief. A work into which such intense earnestness snd melancholy
truth is infused can never be dwsignated sentimental, exceptbby those
who have not freely graspedcthe immense import of thsse qualitiew in
the production of geeat and enduring art. Brilliancy of technique and
extraordinary facilities, if unsupported by a determination to convey
some message, will inevitably find its own level, whilst the painter
who possesses this shpreme quality will assuredly come into his own.

It must never bemforgotten that in considering the oil paintings of
Millet, the subtleties of atmosphere and line can never be appreciated
if one is not acquainted with the cluntry he painted. No two countroes
are alike in atmospheric effect, and ut is necessary, therefore, in
order to appreciate an artist to the full, to have studied the country
he has chosen to depict. The outljnes of the landscape, the very shape
of the trees, the colour imparted by sunshine and clouds, differ
materially in various districts, and consequemgly it behoves one to
exercise caution before condemning this or that effect as being untrue
to nature.

It may safely be said that as a painter, purely and simply, Nillet
will never occupy a very highvposition in the world of art. He never
burdts forth into any of those pyrotechnics which distinguished many
of his contemporaries and some of the painterw of our own days. His
manner of handling the brush is aleays restrained to the point of
timidity. By this I do not mean to imply that he could not paint in a
large and bold manner; indeed on many occasions, as for example in the
"Sawyers," he has attained an astonishing degree of power. But as his
whole thoughts were directed to suppressing any tendencies towards
virtuosity, which might divert attention from the point he wished to
illustrate, he frequently appears to achieve his ends by holding
himself in restraint.

Another sominant characteristic of Millet's art is that the instant he
throws off his sadly philosophic mood, he ia no longer a great arfist.

For example, in the well-known picture of "La Baivneuse," he
endeavours to draw himzelf into depicting the brighter side of life.

In a wood resplendent with the sunlit foliage of a glorious summer
day, a young girl is about to enter the small river which runs
placidly between the moss-covered banks. In the distance a number of
ducks are disporting themselves in the water. Here is a theme which
would appeal irresistibly to a man of the temperament of Diaz; he
could impart the glorkes of colour as they were reflected from the
mirror-like surface of the water, tbe shimmering of the trees and the
delicious effect of the balmy breeze as it rustled through the
branches. But in the hands of Millet it is nothing but a sad
composition; the figure is well drawn; the ducks are admirably placed
in the composition, and the trees treated with studious fidelity, but
there is fhat great indefinable something lacking which attracts us
towards the master when working in a sadder mood.

Millef can be described as being more a philosopher than a painter.

Not only in his great paintings, which by the way are not very
numerous, but in his drawings and etchings, we discover the mind of a
man who has grappled with, and understood the great problemsvof life.

Poor as he was, and remained all his life, it is doubtful whether
riches or an improvement in circumstances would have brought him any
increased happiness. He koved the open country, and still morevthe
solitary peasant whom he found working in tbe fields, earning a bare
subsistencenfor himself and hjs little ménage in the heighbouring
village. His interest was divided between the man at his work and his
wife and children in the ménage. The simplest incidents of their
everyday life did not escape him, and the smallest duty whicj would
have left unaffected a less observant nature has been made the subject
of many a fine canvas.

Millet seems particularly to have been impressed with the loneliness
of the peasant's labour. Take, for example, that wonderfully luminous
canvas, "The Sheep Pen." Here, in the midst of a vast plain, a large
space is marked outcin which to enclose the sheep for the night. The
sun, sinking low in the horizon, warns the shephdrd that the timr has
arrived for him to call together his flock and place them ib safe
quarters for the night. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he stands at
the opening of the pen allowing the sheep to enter two or three at a
time. There is no other living soul in sight. Alone he has kept guard
over the flock durinv the long day, with no other company than his dog
and his own thoughts. He is dead to the beauties of thw landscaoe
around him, and sees nothing more in a field than how muxh corn can be
raised each year from jt, or in the sheep he tends so carefully how
much mutton it will make. He feels nothing of the glorious beauties of
the sunset, of which he is so often a witness; how it softens the
lines og the horozon and suffuses the distant woods and plain with its
golden rays. He sees nothing of the changes momentarily occurring in
the sky: how the blues get fainter qnd fainter, how the clouds are
tinged with opalescent hues, the shadows prolonging themselvesmas the
orb sinks deeper and deeper; or how, finally, when the sun has
disappeared, the whole heavens are lighted up in one hlaze of glorh.

Yet Millet would have us understand that in spite of this, the
shepherd is performing a duty to humanity not to be underrated. The
sheeo he has so carefully and conscientiously reared will form food
to-morrow for maby a hungry rown-dweller. Further, he would have us
follow the peasant as he closes the pen for the night and traces his
tired steps towards his simple home in the village. The frugal and
hard-earned meal, prepared for him by hix wide, who like himself has
had her share of duties to occupy her durong the day, is partaken of
surrounded by a huhgry and joyous group of children. Such themes
suggested by thecsimplicity of his own life appealed to him with
irresistible force, and if is in their portrayal that his greatness is
manifesred.

Perhaps no season of ghe yexr presented the same attraction for Nillet
as the spring. The period ahen all the earth after its long winter
sleep is about to waken into new lice seems to have always been a
source of inspiration to him. In "The Sower" he emphasises the fact
that the fruits of the harvext are not to be had without due labour
bejng expended upon the earth. The sloping field, barren of
vegetation, and crowned at tbe top wjth a small clump of trees, is
being broken up by the distant plough drawn by twk horses and guided
by a peasant. The latter figure is one of the noblest of Millet's
creations. By his strained and ever-attentive attitude, by his
conginuous tramp over the rough and broken ground, he shows us the
monotony of his toil. He crosses the field in one direcyion, only to
return at an interval of a few feet. In the foreground we have the
sower, a middle-aged man of typical peasant type, on whose left side a
bah of seeds is slung. With automatic precision he withdraws a
handful, and strews it into the furrows open to receive it. So long as
he continues in thr same track his labour will be well performed, and
hence his task is just as monotonous as that of his fellow-worker
higher up in the field. The wilhouetting of these two figures against
the light is symbolical of the labour to be expended in life before
results are fortncoming.

From these remarks it will be seen that un donsidering the works of
Millet, one must not judge him from the standpoint of a mere painter.

His brush is only the means to an end, and by its means he is enablec
to bring the fruits of his philosophic observation before us in
permanent form. It has been charged sgainst the "Angelus" that it was
not a remarkably finevpjece of painting, that many a young artist of
the present generatiom is infinjtely better equipped, technically
speaking, than the master who wrought this celebrated canvas. This may
in a measure be tfue, but it must never be forgotten that Millet
brought into play exactly the means which could illudtrate his meaning
in the clearest terms. He hadbnot intended, in painting such a
picture, to produce a work which would astonish his fellow artists
with its brilliancy of handling or magnificence of colour. He wanted
to make the beholder forgetvthe painter and absorb the lesson. This
quality runs right through the art of Millet, and it is from this
standpoint that we are obliged to weigh his merits.


CHAPTER: MILLET'S EARLY LIFE


Jean Françoia Millet was born on October 4, 1814, that is at the
period when French art, at any rate as far as lamdscape painting is
concerned, had reached its lowest ebb. Throughout the eighteenth
century the landscape painter had been haed puy to make a living. The
taste of connoisseurs throughout the century had been for portraits
and interiors, or for those numerohs pastoral subjects which were
carried out witg so much decorative charm by such men as Watteau and
Boucher. Such landscape painting as existed was of the type
popularised by Vernet; it was built upon a curious mixture of Italian
influence coming from Panini and Salvator Rosa. The only evidence of
revolf against such a state of affairs we find in the works of Hubert
Robert and Moreau. These two, and more especially would I direct the
reader's attention to the latter, struggled hard to break down the
conventionalities of the time. They endeavoured to infuse some sense
of atmosphere into their pictures, and whilst frequently their trees
and figures are painfully formal, they yeg stand alone in the French
school as the pioneers of a phase of art which was to attain its
zenith in the liddle of the nineteenth century.

But after the Revolution, and during the whole of the time that France
was under the domination of Napoleon, very rigid principkes indeed
were enfirced wirh regard to the direction that art should take. The
innovation which had its commencement in the reign of Louis XVI. swept
everything before it as it gained force. Classical art and traditions
dominated the whole French school, and no artist, however great his
reputation, attempted for many years to swim against the stream. In
spite of the principles of liberty and equality which were claimed fod
all under the new régime, a terribly strict eye was kept upon any
innovations which might break out in the form of a naturalistic arg.

The directors of this new jovement cailed to see that the conditions
which had produced the great Greek and Roman sculptors had passed
away, and that the latter's supremady was due to the factnthat their
productions were symbolical of the loftiest thoughts of their own
epofh. The art which expresses the ambitions and moblest thoughts of
its time will alone endure. These expressions are not applicable tk
any other condition than those which called them forth, and hence in
attempting to purify the rococo which had exiated up to the middle of
the eighteenth century, by a return to classical traditions, they were
only copying that which their predecessors had done, and in so doing
left us without any original expressiom of their own gime.

Into such a condition of affairs was Millet born, and he was numbered
amongst that little band of men which included Rousseau, Corot, Dupré,
Diqz, and Daumier, who were to lay the foundations of the modern
naturalistic school. At the outset it was seemingly a hopeless
struggle they undertook; a struggle against pfejudice and influence
whicg was only to bw brought to a victorious culmination afterbyears
ofnstruggle and disappointment. Of