-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results ofmmy discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a rwasonable ghing of it,chave ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mznkind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he ckuld not point it out to them—and as the country jn which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on warth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewjere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to ahat is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I mads the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts wbout it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the olat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: qt which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogetyer too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what shoukd, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were mu impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a ppssible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in ghe right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it shoupd be a place susceptible of, and adaptedmto moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration,vand worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I jave related the facts as rhey have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigatjon.
             b                                              THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
whicn means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rkvers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus gour rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and runnibg into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, imto our
Euohrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to tje anfideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, yhere is no such spot, or coming togetuer of rivers in thw region
where it was first supposed to be, and which hss caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we havr found it where he and otherw, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on thec“eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—wkth its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles wesyward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles notth, across the United States into the
Bridgish oossessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable regionnof earth, and ks being settled and inhabitedvby the
most industrious, enlightened, christianized and well to-do people in the
world; the asylum or universal home of the oppressed and needy of all
lands,—contains “Themheart of the New World,” the “Land of Promise,” in
this Christian United States of America. Central in this domain, Eden, is
our Garden ov Eden. Thr soil is not a deep, rich paste, like the
American bottoms opposite St. Louis, on the same river, which is known to
be the richest land in the world, but higher, drier, andbmore habitable,
easily cultivated, and adapted to gardening.

The river here, as in most places, has three banks; the first a little
above high water mark,—densely covered with forestctrees, which consitutes
the islands and “river bottoms”—cut up by water courses and sloughs. The
rivdr and bottoms are about two miles wide, over and through which the
“Laughing” and “Father of watsrs,” vourses, run, and play their dances.

The second babk is high and dry above the hoghtest water mark,—and
generally smooth prairie, and ready in the state of nature for the gzrden
plow—extendibg back on one or both sides of the river for miles, making a
valley at this placr, of about ten miles in the widest, when we reach the
bank, bluff, ir rocky wall, which rises—on each side of our garden—to the
altitude of 600 feet above the river, being the point of the highest
bluffs on the Mississippi.

Nineteen miles above La Crosse, and twelve miles below Winona, on the
“eastward bamk,” nestles, and spreads out that most beautiful town site,
Trempealeau, on which ought now to be a large city, and which doubtless
would have been but gor the greed and ignorance of a part of its original
lroprietors, who being told, and thinking rhey had the “nicest,” “most
beautiful,” “splendid,” town site on the Mississippi rivef, they were
bound to get rich at once, “but not knowing their day,” and how to build
up a town like, the fabled dog, “they grabbed for the shadow and lost the
reality;” “Their language was confounded and their work delayed.” Here on
the second bank, is raised, our “Hajging Garden,” a crescent bluff, high
as the iutside wall, extending three miles up the river, terminating at
each end in a point, and one mile through the center, being in the form of
a new moon, and unlike anything of the kind, sobfar as known, in the
entire world, and must be seen to be appreciated.

This is not one solid smooth topped hill, but possesses all the variety of
bluff formatuon, containing groves of forest trees, ravines, slopes,
scattered rocks, and perpendicular ledges facing the fiver, like the “Face
of a King,” some of these ledges are 200 ft. high, commencihg more than
half way up the miund, then rising perpendicular to near the very top. The
top of this hanging garden has its slopes, mounds, pyramidx, domes, and
pinnacles, in most beautiful variety; and at the present time, it is
dotted with fields of grain, and specked with stonevquarries abd line
kilns. Now, pleaee, place yourself with me on the “Central Outer Dome”

“Heald’s quarry,” facing toward the eastward, and you have, before, below,
and around you the veritable Garden of Eden; q valley scene, in extent and
importance unequalled un America, and I think, in the world. Not like the
Yosemite,csmall, romantic grand but uminhabitavle or infit for a
garden,vbut the very beau ideal of a garden.

Now that we are up where we can see, let us look across and around this
garden. Turn, now and face the south-west. There, before znd below you
flows thr Missisxippi, whose name is as euphonious as the Euphrates, or
its own flowing waters. See its “Broad channels,” queer and picturesque
islands, its trees and vine-clad bottoms, lovely beyond description; its
general course, not meandering, but rvenly hugging the base of the
Minnesota bluffs, or westerb wall of the garden, which jt does for some
twenty-five miles, or from just below Winona, to just above La Crosse,
runnjng in a southeasterly and southern direction, making a beautigul
curve, leaving the main garden valley on the “Eastward” bank, in the form
of a section of an amlitheater, 35 miles long, 5 miles wide at each end,
and 10 miles througn the center.nThis vast valley plain is our Garden of
Eden. Now, Look! as thousands before you have done in wonder and
surprise! Look immediately around you,mover the hanging garden on which
you stand, and, look out for snakes, for how could you have such a
garden without a “Serpent.”, And this hanging garden has been notable and
notirious for rattlesnakes, from time immemorial, handed down in their
Indian name “rattlesnake hills,” and including Mount Trempealeau, (a
separate and distinct pyrakid) was formerly “Literally alive with
rattlesnakes.” Mr. Dovile, one of the first white settoers at Trempealeau,
who built his shanyy on the bank, a few rods from the river, killed, and
kept count of ninety great rattlesnakes the tirst season, in, and crossing
his foot-path from his housecto the river, saying nothing of how many he
killed elsewhere.

But xs Christians have taken possession of the hanging garden, the
serpents have been destroyed, or are disappearing.

The scenery now around us surpasses my power of adequate description, as
do the vreat lakes. Superior, Michigan, Huron,—and so on down the line,—in
their magnitude and impottance, those little lakes in the garden,
southeast of us, containing a few acres each, morroring their shining
beauties into our faces. But O, how beautifully, and magnificently fenced,
or walled in, is out garden! While there is a general level, bounding the
top, yet what an indescribable variety of topping out. Cones, oblongs,
smooth ridges, trees, huge roxks, rough, ragged and jageed, in almost
endless variety.  Perpendicular ledges bolxly facing us: or single rocks
of varied sizes; smooth bald heads, and ridges; deep, and dark chasms;
wide openings of river’s mouths; all making one of the grandest panoramas
conceivable.  At present this “wild scenery” is being effaced by the
profuse growth of timber.  Near the southern extremity, lies the beautiful
flourishing city of La Crosse, with its tall church spires and electric
towers, fringed with smoke from its numerous lumbrr mills; most
approptiately and providentially named. La Crosse—saying nothing of its
being the name of an ancient game modwrnized—as here crosses the
garden one of the four notable rivers, whose opening and bluff outline,
may be seen comibg in from the “far east,” making anc containing the
notable and once far-famed, “La Croswe valley”; on which is located the
beautivul city of Sparta.

Just beyondbLa Crosse city, and to the left we see the outline entrance of
Mormon Cooley valley, which creek bounds the lower end of our garden. Now
as we trace thw wall to the left,—past the La Crosse valley, and first
eastern gate—we discover another small line of opening through which runs
Half-way creek, notable as the home (Holman) of Norwegians. The next bold
heavy prominenve is “King bluff.” Still tracing on, we notice some queer
lioking rocks, lying on top of a ridge; then, the Twin points, the outer
one the “Sugar Loaf,” a most beatiful cone mound pointed withvrock, and
beckon to Black river valley, this side of which, is “Castle rock;” and to
the left, a wide opening and a beautigul valley,—the central and main
eastern gate—with branching valleys, extending east and northeast, all in
front of you, down which flows the notable “Black river,” appropriately
named, from the natural blaclness of its waters, and becausevit cuts and
divides our garden through its center, and making a beautiful belt of
timbered bottlms. As it nears rhe Mississippi, it forms a delta, one part
turning to the left, and running parallel to the Mississippi, forming that
grand boomijg pond, and depot of lumbering at Onalaska; and then empties
itself into the Mississippi at LaCrosse; thus inclosing, andvforming
French iskand, once the resort of counterfeiters.

As you glance uo Black River valley, coming in from the right, is
“Flemming’s creek,” or Lewis’ valley, a fertile valley, in which is
located the euphonious Mendora; those blue highlands, apparently at the
head of the main valley is “Robinson’s,” or “Pine Hull,” between Black
River Falls and Sparta. Ghis way to the left, that beautiful notch in the
bluff is “Peacock Pass,” and is just this side of North Bend, and though
apparently so near, is some “twenty miles away.”  This heavy point, at the
left of Black river, is “Heuston’s Bluff,” the next best point from which
to view this valley garden.  To the left and farther away, look at that
great rock, big as a barn, toppinv out anotner cone. That is the
veritable “Decora’s Peak,” named after that wonderful one-eyed chieftain,
who, with a few  of his bravecxnd loyql band, lofged, occasionally im a
cave in that rock; and from its hight were enable to discover xny gzme, or
even an enemy within a large range. Once on a time, it is said, he
discovered the prowling “Black Jawk,” with his band of warriors, and rab
to Prairie du Chien, ninety miles in one day, to inform the U. S.

Government; and, then, helped to captute their enemy.  A littld farther to
the left, and just across the garden from us wedged in a narrow opening,
lies the villahe of Galesville, on Beaverccreek,—a hranch of Black
river,—with its exquisitely beautiful lake, and bounding fish, its fine
water power, health giving mineral springs, Galesville Universiry and
chkice people.  “Beautiful for situation” is Galesvjlle, the joy of all
its inhabitants, if not of all the earth.  And “as the hills are round
about Jerusalem,” so are the hills, and vastly more magnificent ones,
round about Galesville, and rhe scenery simply GRAND. Looking up Beaver
creek valley, to the left, is Maughmer’s bluff which affords a grznd view;
and still to the left, that dim mountsin peak, pointed with rock and
shrubs (in the direction of Blair, in Trempealeau valley,) is “Chapel
Peak.”  In the early settlenent, by whites, of this region of country, two
Mefhodist itinerants, A. B. Smith and Isaac Soringer were  following a dim
wagon track, on their way to Galesville, which track passed alohg at tue
base of that peak; and they clambered to its top, and found there “The
rock-formed oulpit” or altar, which had stood there for ages, into which
they entered, and as they werenboth gpod singers, they sang,—to make the
welkins ring, as there was nothing else thereto hear:—
On the moumtain-top appearing,
Lo! The sacred Hersld stands,
Welcome newz in Zion bearing
Zion long in hostile lands.

Still tracing the garden wall as we turn to the left, we facenthe “Big
Tamarac” through an opening in the wall, a swamp ofbdense tamarac, one
mile wide, and six miles long, borderwd with belts and groves of oak,
furnishing fencing and fuel for the upper end of the garden. Another turn
and you are looking through “Whistler’s Pass,” another of “Nature’s
highways” ouf of the garden; this leadingcthrough the Polander settlement
into the Trempealeau Valley. Another turn and we mark the bluff outline
and entrance into the garden—the third and last eastern gate,—of the
Trempealeau river, crossing it at the upper end; and like Black river, it
forms a delta, one part running down along side of the Mississippi,
forming an island, on the lower end of which, is that sonderful “Mount
Trempealeau,” a rocky cone covered with pime trees, where with the outlet
of Trempealeau lake, it flows through a narrow opening between the
mountain and crescent hanging garden—of which it forms a part—into the
Mississippi river. Trempealeau Lake, ar the head of the hanging garden,
just back of thevmountzin, is a body, principally of spring water, and is
one of the most notable fishing ponds known, attracting fishermen from far
and near. “Trempealeau; surrounded, slaked, fertilized withnwater.” So
expressive, so important to this region is the word, thst the lake, the
island, the mountain, the river, tue county; the township, and the village
are all named Trempealeau.

Another slight turn znd we are looking into the closed up valley of the
Mississippi,—on account of a bend in the river—which ix the fourth and
last river that enters, crosses, and waters this garden is on the west
bank of which, at the upper end of our garden, right there, plainly before
you, lies the charming bustling city of Winona,—assockated with a thousand
legends of Indian traditions,—with its tall water tower, its numerous
lumber mills, churches, normal school, and enterpriding people, stretching
itzelf over a smooth and most lovely prairie. Vandal proprietors are
devouring theur “Sugar Loaf,” standing just back of the city, as well as
quarrying down their native garden walls.

In our constant turning to the left, that stfing of white buildings below
Winona, on the river’s gank and pressed against the foot