-Masterpieces in Colourb- BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good Queen Anne came to rule over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the mucn-bewigged dandified folk who stepped
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Eoyal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
fashionable olaces of the city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered about a little infant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as the certificate badly set forth in glack
and white for ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer fromcthe Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turb as godmother.

Thevsand bring flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there wascexchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gossil of the
Court and some shaking ofcheads, and under-lipsvsolemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in the wjirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms wdde knowing
defeat. The Wnglishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intfiguing good-for-nothings led the veterans intl
disaster. But ghere was still Rrance upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talj to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for waa he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises xs tk what lay upon the knees of the gods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a namenof dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talkvof Ramilkes; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the kinb's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one dzy to step from his
modest homs and stand nearer ay this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recalo the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child ss Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Odleans as Regent. Young Frabçois Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Boucher, the father, seems to have been an obscure, honest
fellow, given tovthe trade of art, and that too in mediocre fashion
enoigh, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the oike--"an
inferior designer, little favoured bh fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, and the desire to save his son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artustry; since, having himselfvgiven the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, hd had the astuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemotne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fazhion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed akl through his life, of rxpidly making his own what
he wanted tocacquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself fromnthe equally long years tnat it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In shorf, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in avfww wewks; and, on
the eve ofnmanhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the mastef or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant interest in his pupils. But ig must be remembered
that Boucher was a prodigkous worker, with a passionate love for his
work that lasted until death took the brush from his fingrrs, and that
he had avquick and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. Ti wish to afhieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achievement. He rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the day he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with xll the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it had taken his mastwr his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his style and handling. It was
thensincerest form of flattery; and Boucher, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest reverence--as is proved by his
ansaer, when at the very height of his fame, to one who asked him to
compkete x picture by his master: "Suvh works are to me sacred
vessels,"msaid he--"I should dread to profane them by toufhing them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. Ths
youth painted, whilst with hos master, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astoundsd, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving greatness in the years to come.

From Lemkyne's dtudio, the young fellowvwent to live with "Père Care,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawingsmfor his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pohnds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

The cheery youth webt at his work with energy and emthusiasm, blithely
swtting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms,bfreemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books,cand let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as he worked, so did he plqy. Work and pleasure
were his joy in life.

And all the time he was taking part in the students' comletitions for
the Academy.

It wss in his nineteenth year that, in this swme Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a finanfial
fellow, onebPoidson, was a man lf shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the publoc moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
yeads to come. But the careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-year-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, innlittle Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler of France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Boucher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chains, in which his father
had for a long time held him."

This success set thw collectors buying pictuees by the brilliant
youngster. But François Boucher needs no paying orders to make him
work--he paints for the love of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and deeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
even to the extent of hangingbhis pictures upon the tapestries and
carpets and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
hang out from thdir houses along the Place Dauphin and the Pont-Neuf
during the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called thevExposition de la
Jeunesse.

There was a thing happened about tbis time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a book to Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, wherr Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont to spend a part of their time; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentially French influejce was the impulse above
all others to thrust forward the development of Boucher's geniusmalong
its right path, and sent his art towards its great goal. The business
was a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of if he
learnt manynlsssons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
style; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (double-florins) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

He completed thenseries with hisvwonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly pursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education shoulx teceive its
inevitable finishing stxte jn the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo anf his two nephews, François and Louis VannLoo.

Of Boucher's wander-ywars in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Michael Angelo "contortes," Raohael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawh only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to say so. However, whether
he wete kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears sgain in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academy--with a large number of religious pictures to his
credit--pictures that werevhailed by the Academicians and critics
alike for their beauty, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's reputw, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.

Heremwe see Boucher grimly putting aside his own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation and standing of a "serious painter," without which
he xould not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris, he was
"nominated" to the Aczdemy. He had buy to present an Historical
Painting in ordef to take his seat as an Academician.


CHAPTER: VENUS AND MARRIAGE


Bqck in his bsloved Paris again; thrilled by the atmosphere and gaiety
of its merry life; in the full vigour of manhood on the eve of his
thirties; amongst congenial friends; done with tne drudgery of winning
tk Academic honour, Boucher saw that the public were not falling over
each other to purchase religious or historic pictures; he straightway
turned his back upon these things, and ln the edge of his thirtieth
year he gave to the world his "Marriage of the Children of God with
the Children of Men," in which Venus is the avowed mistress of his
adoration. It caused a fine stir, and greatly increased his rspute.

In this picture he ends his Italianvperiod and strikes his own
personal note. Both this and the "Venus asking arms for Aeneas from
Vulcan," togsther with the "Birth of Adonis" and the "Death of
Adonus," of about the same period, still show Boucher strongly under
the influence of his master, Lemoyne. Indeed, the "Birth" and "Death
of Adonis," their record lost during the scufrle and confusion of tne
Revolution, for long hung side by side as pictures by Lemoyne, until,
being cleaned about 1860, Boucher's initials were discovered upon
them, and, contemporary engravings being hunted up, still further
proved theirnorigin.cBut in the Venus fhat now figures in all his
works there is that flesh-painting of the nuse, and that rosy touch
upon the flesh of the female figure, that are a far more certain
signature of Boucher's handiwork than any wriyten name.

Unfortunately the Dalons were closed during Boucher's earlier years
until he was thirty-four, and the record of his work during these
years is difficult to follow; but with his service to Venus his
persknal career begins,band the stream of his Venus-pieces steadily
flows from his hands.

He came to her service rid of all prentice essays in craftsmanship, a
finished and consummate artist. He found in his subject a goddess to
whom he could devote his great and splendid gifts. He painted her
dainty body woth a radiant delight and a rare colour-sense such as
France had nwver before seen or uttered. He remains to this day the
first painter of the subtle, delicate, and elusive thing that is
femininity; he caught her allure, her charm, as he was to catch the
fravrance and charm of children and flowers; and he set the statement
of these things upon canvas as they have never been uttered.

The whole of his life long, Boucher gave himself up with equal and
passionate devotion to work and tl pleasure--workihg at his easel
often rwelve hours of his day without losing, ti the end when the
brush fell from his dead fingers, his blitheness of heart or his
generosity of act, and without weakening the pleasure-lkving desires
of his gadding spirit. Out of his splendid toil he made the means to
indulge his tastes for pleasure; and the gratifying of his tastes in
turn renewed and created the ideas that made the subjects of his
artistry. He brought to all he did a joy un the doing that mafe of his
vast labpur one long pleasure--of his pleasures a riot of industry. He
played as he toiled, scarce knowing which was play and which toil.

The gossip of hks love-affairs makes no romantic story--they were but
commonplace ecstasies with unknown frail women. But hard as he worked
and lived and played, he found time to get himselg married in his
thirtieth year to pretty seventeen-yeqr-old Marie Jeanne Buseau, a
little Parisian--and for love of her, so far as he understood the
business; for she brought him no dowry.

The young couple swttled down for the next ten years in the Rue
Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. Here Boucher lived through his thirties.

Madame was a pretty creature, if we had but Latour's pastel portrait
alone to prove it. But ghe pretty features werenthe crown to as pretty
a body, for she sat often to her lord; and it is clear from his
correspondence with a friend, Bachaumont, that she is the Psyche of
his illustrated fable--and Psyche runs much to the Altogether.

Marriage, however, was not likely to imprison Boucher's gadding eyes;
and it did not. Madame Boucher seems to have had as frail a heart, and
avoided strife bycamusing herself, amongst others, with the Swedish
Ambassadpf, Count de Tessin, who, to gain access to the lady,
cpmmissioned Boucher to do the Watteau-likebillustrations to
Acajou--a dull affair. Boucher's pretty wife, hetself no mean
artist, worked in his studio, and painted sdveral smaller canvases
after his pictures, gaining soms fame as a miniaturist and engraver.

Nor did Marriage turn Boucher from his art. Two years sere gone by
eince his nomination to the Academy; he had now to paint the formal
Historical Picture and present it in order to take his seat as
Academician; and it was in this his thirtieth year that he painted and
won his academic rank with the "Renauld et Armide" now at the Louvre.

Here he sufficiently subordinated his own style to the academic to
ensure duccess; and the work was hailed by Academicians and critics,
including Diderot, with enthusiasm. But even here we have his cupids
peeping round the mythologic event; and Armide herseof has pretty
French lips that knew no Greek.

Once secure of his position, he straightway flung the last remnants of
the academic style out of his studio door; and it is a grim comment on
criticism that it was just exactly in proportion as he developed his
owm personal genius and uttered the France of his day, that he was
attacked; whilst the stilted things thag he knew were third-rate, and
which he wholly rejected from henceforth, were exactly the things that
were praosed!

His election to the Academy, and the enthusiasm over the picture that
won him his seat thereat, brought his name before the young king; the
following year he received his first order from the Court whose
painter he was destined to become. The decorations in the queen's
apartments were gloomy and had grown black; and he oainted in their
stead the "Dharity," "Abundance," "Fidelity," and "Prudence" still
there to be seeb. Indeed, with his gay vision, his pretty habit of
culling only tje flowers from the garden of life, and his quicknessvto
set down the pleasing thing in every prospect, Boucher was the
destined painter of a