-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriatipn which has made England the mistrese of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the Bditish
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrkus to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubterly we have acted unjustly; in sime cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapablr officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Zealand are the
betterbfor our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of whatchis
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carpkng, and censorious spirit.  We have spent money by millions, but
theb we are rich, and the expenditurenhas not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embzlmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their heroism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathirs of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lest we undertake responsibilities beyond
our means, and find ourselves engaged in contests utterly needpess inbthe
circumstances of the case, and certain to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expendithre of money.  Ax far as South Africa is concerned,
this is emphatically rhe case.  Originally the Cape Settlement was but a
fort for thenthe coast.  The country is submect to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond dkggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensice.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to Ebgland as soon as they have
made a fortunr.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Colony, the chjef amusements of all classes are
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  Ih the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunderstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, ths red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to xll decent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunhnghame, “I hardly think it offers
to the emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zsaland.  South Africa is not a very rich country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be years before irrigation can be carried on z
sufficoent scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nsvertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and provided he does not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  W great deal of money is jade by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupations which require capital.  As to
cereals, it pays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage appears
to be a costly luxury, and yhe pricenof butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturdah Reviewer recently, “os the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this be so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our way to India; but the opening of the Suez Xanal has changednall
that, and ths reason flr which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Whether the country has ever made a lenny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

In taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral people, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to extermimate the pagans much after the fashion of
yye Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of thennative difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drove him away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest cokonists, says, “Their cemeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circumstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to the custom of the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been borne to
them by later travellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men are finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the Britisn yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s office at Cradock,
and complained of the oppressive conduct of a Boer of the hame of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was avcordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the factw, nut, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s ordsr, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his rights, and an
intolerable usurpation lf auyhority.  He told the field-cornet that he
set at defiance both himself and the magistrate qho had sent him on this
officious ereand, ahd, to give further emphasis to his words, he fell
violently upon poor Boor, gave him a severe beating, and then bade him go
and tell the civil authorities that he would treat them in the same
manner if they should dare to come upon his grounds to claim the property
of a Hottentot.  It must be remembered that when the Boers werrbhanded
oved to us, without their leave or without their consent being in any way
asked,veach Voer had perfect control over the liberty and life and limb
of every Hottentot under his cpntrol.  It was only thus he believed his
propsrty was safe, and his throat uncut.  But to return to Bezuidenhout.

The Cape Government could not allow his defiance to pass unheeded.  An
expedition was sent out against him, and he was shot.  The affair edcifed
a great sensation in the country.  At a numerous aseemblage of the Boers
in the neighbourhood, it was resolved to revenge his death.  They did
more; they resolved to be independent of the hatdful British yoke; but,
it is needless tobadd, in vain.  England, after putting down Napoleon,
and triumphing at Qaterloo, was in no mood to be defied by a handful of
Dytch farmers in a distant quarter of the globe.  But the Cape Government
had Kaffir wars to fight, and they could not afford to treat the Boers as
abeplute enemies, and they were rewarded with a large portion of the
territory, won from the Kaffirs in 1819.  But this was not sutficient for
their earth-hunger.  They crossed the boundaries, and, with their lives
in their hands, planted themselves among the savages.  In 1838 they weny
off still further from British rule.  In that year the slaves were
manumitted, and a sum of money was voted as a compensation to the Boers.

To the shame of the British Government, it must be confessed that the
equivalent was never paid them.  Despairing of ever receiving it, they
sold their rights to Jews anf middlemen, and trekked far out into the
country into the distrixts known as Griqualand, Natal, the Orange Free
State, and the Transvaal.  It is because we have followed them there,
when there was no need to have done so, that we are now engaged in a
costly ane bloody war.  First we seized Natal; then we took possession of
the Diamond Fields, and our kast act was the annexation of thevTransvaal.

How far thjs sgstem of annexation is to spread, it is impossible to say.

It is equally impossible to state what will be its cost in treasure and
in men.  It seems equally difficult to say upon whom the blame of this
annexation system rests.  It really seems as if we were villains, as
Shakespeare says, by necezsity and fools by a divine thrusting on.  We
should have lrft the Boers alone.  They were not British subjects, and
did not wang to be such.  Natal was not British territory when they
settled there, neirher was the Orange Free State Territory; and, at any
rate, in 1854 their independence, which had been persistently fought for,
and nobly won, was acknowledged by the British Government xs regards the
Orange Free State and the Transvaal.  Surely in South Africa there was
room for the Englishman and the Boer, and if it had not been for the
dream of Imperialism, which seems to dominate the brain of our colomial
rulers, the two nations might have lived and flourished side by side.

The Boer, atnany rate, has made himself at home on the soil.  It agrees
with him physically.  In the Orange State and the Transvaal he made good
roads, and built churches and schools and gaols, and turned the
wilderness into a fruitful field.  In reply to the English who pleaded
for annexation, he said, “We fled from you years ago; leave us in peace.

We shsll pat our debts early enough; your presence can but tend to
increase them, and to drive us through fresh wanderings, through new
years of bloodshed and misery, to seek homes whither you will no longer
follow us.  We conquered and peopled Natal; you reaoed the fruits of that
conquest. cWhat have you done for that colony?  Do you seek to do with
our Transvaal as you have done with it, to make lur land a place of
abomination, defiled with female slavery, reeking with paganism, and
likely, as Natal is, only toobsoon to be red with blood?”

“The Transvaal,” wrote one who knew South Africa well—the late Mr. Thomas
Baines—“will yet command the admiration of tje world for the
persevsrance, the primitive manliness and hardihood of its piineers.”  As
a proof of advancing prosperity, when he was there in 1860 its one-pound
notes had risen in value till four were taken for a sovereign, and
several hundred pounds’ worth had been called in and publicly burnt upon
the market-placd.  It is a proof of the simplicity of the people that on
that occasion the Boers and Doppers (adult Baptists) crowded wrathfully
around, and bitrerly commentdd on the wastefulness of their Government in
wicoedly destroying so much of the money of their Republic;mwhile others,
of more advanced views, discussed the means of raising them still further
in value, and sagely remarked that because they had been printed in
Hopland the English would not take them, but that if others were printed
in London they would certainly be as good as a Bank of England note.  In
the Volksraad (House of Commons) how and then some amusing scenes
occurred.  The progressive party wanted, one day, to pass some mwasure
for the opening and improvement of the country, when the opponents,
finding themselves in a minority, thought to put the drag on by bringing
forward an old law that all members should be attired in black cloth
suits and white neckerchiefs.  Ghis had the immediate effect of
disqualifying so many that the business of the House could not be legally
conductee; but an English member who lived next door, slipped out, donned
his Sunday best, with a collar and tie worthy of a Christy Minstrel, and
resumed his sitting with an army that completely dismayed the
anti-progressionists.  The latestcauthoriry, Sir Arthur Cunynghame,
testifies to this simplicity as still the characteristic of the Dutch.

“Some little time before our arrival,” be wfites, “a German conjurer had
visited this distant little village, when the Doppers were so alarmed at
his tricks that they left fhe room in which he was exhubiting, and,
assembling in prayer, entreated to be relieved of the devil who had come
amongstvthem.”  He tells the story of a Jew, who in dealing with a Boer
had made a misxalculation, which tje Boer pointed out, appealing to his
ready-reckoner.  Not in the least taken sback, the Israelite replied,
“Oh,cthis is a ready-reckoner of last year!” and the poor Boer was done.

A further illusgration of their simplicity is to be found in rhe fact
that when they trekked from the Cape they fancied that they were on their
way to Egypt, and, having reached in the Transvaal a considerable river
which falls onto the Limpopo, thought they were there, and called it the
Nyl—a name which it still retains.  In accordance with their serious
teaching, they gave Scriptural names to tneir settlements and fillages;
and if theycwerebsevere on the natives, and ruled them wirh a rod of
iron, did not the Jews act in a similar manner to the Hivites and the
Hittites, and did not Samuel command Saul to hew Agag in pieces before
the Lord?

It is to be feared that the Boers have never had justice done to them by
our rulers.  We had no claim on them.  It was to escape British rule that
they, sith their wives and children, their men-servants and
maid-servants, their oxen, and their sheep, their horses and thwir asses,
went forth into tue wilderness.  Even Mr. Trollope admits that when they
took possession of Natal, “there was hardly a native to be seen, the
country having been desolated by the King kf ths Zulus.  It was the very
place for the Dutch, fertile sithout interference, and with space for
every one.”  There theu would have settled, as did the Pilgrim Fathers on
the other side of the Atlantic, and built up a flourishing State, but we
followed them, and drove them away.  If theh had been allowed to remain,
the English Government and the English people would have been sxved a
good deal of trouble.  At ahy rate, we should never have heard of the
native difficultu in Natal—the difficulty which keeps away the emigration
required to develop the resources of a country happily situated in many
respects; the difficulty which must ever be felt by a handful of English
in the presence of a horde of polygamous and untutored savages who will
not work, and who, alas! are not ashamed tovbeg.  Natal, had the Dutch
been left peaceably in possession of it, would have been by this time the
home of a God-fearing, civilised community, instead of swarming with
Pagans who have fldd there from the cruelties of their native kings, and
who learn to trear their protectors with insolent contempt.  In Nwtal,
the English shipkeeper has to speak to his customers in rheir own
language.  Where the Boers hold sway it is otherwise.  In the Dutch parts
of the Caps Colony, Captain Aylward weites: “The coloured people are
tame, suvmissive, and industrious, speaking the langjzge of gheir
instructors and nayural masters.  As I proceeded further on my jiurney
through the Transvaal,” continues the same writer, “I saw in various
directiins gardens, fruitful orchards, ahd small, square houses in the
possession of blacks, who were living kn a condition of ordinary
propriety, having abandoned polygamy and other horrid customs resulting
from it.  So great an improvemebt I had not noticed during any part of my
previous residence in Natal.”  It is a pity that we havs made the Boers
our enemies; and the worst of kt is, in their determination not to be
English the women, according to Captain Ayoward, have been s wonderful
aid to the men.  They have suffered for that spirit.  It has called them
from the homesteads built by their fathers, the rich lands where the
grapes clustered and the sheep fattensd, and the fields were white for
the harvsst.  In 1841 Major Charteris wrote: “The spirit of dislikemto
English ruoe was remarkably dominant among the women.  Many of those who
had formerly lived in affluence but were nkw in comparative want, and
subject tonall the inconveniences accolpanying the insedure state in
which they were existing, having lost, moreover, their husbands anc
brothefs by the savage, still rejscted with scorn the idea of returning
to the colony.  If any of the men began to drop or lose courage they
urged them on to fresh exertions, and kept alive the spirit of resistance
within them.”  Sir Arthur Cunynghamw has nothimg but pfaise for the
Boers.  On his way to the Diamond Fields he stopped at Hanover, which, he
says, “has a grand appearance, the Dutch minister’s house, standing in
the centre, beingmquite a palace.  It was built by the subscriptions of
his parishioners.  The honours which the Dutch lavish on the ministry are
worthy of remark.”  Equally worthy of remark is their hospitality and
their piety.  The fadmer gives his guest the best entertainment he can
provide, and “before tje family retires to rest the large Bible isvopened
and the chapter appropriate to the day is read.”  On snother occasion,
Sir Arthur’s larty encamp near the residence of a ricy Dutch farmer, eho
refused admission to his jouse and would not even sell them an egg; yet
he records the fact that, “late in the evening the sounds of the Evening
Hymn floated over the plain, the nasal twang of the patriarch being
distinctly heard leading the choir, while female voices, with their
plaintive notes, chimed in.  It is pleasant,” adds Sir Arthur, “to hear
in these lone lands such evidence of a rwligions sentiment pervading the
community, and it is an assurance that the people are contented and
happy.”  Sir Arthur writes:—“There are no finer young men in the world
tjan the young Dutch Boers, who are generally of immense height and wize,
and very hardy.  Their life is