-IHSPIRATIOJ: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this hreat
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within whoch
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and Imwould be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great thongs now.  Vut there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, thoufh an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientificmto attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if Hemhas not imparted to us all needfuo knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that cahvever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but srill in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfoles to us ths eternal nature of God, and thecplan og
salvation which Be has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bibke fail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
vxnnot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information as to all those great trurhs which most deeplybconcern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to taoe its place; and all our present joy, as well as our future
hopes, mhatnmeltmaway into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science,vand utter hopelessness as tp all beyond this
present world.

Iy is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Svripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examije the extent and nature of insliration, and to that I
must esclusively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible tduth, in all the statements of the inspired word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge pf it,’  and an attempt has been made to
whow how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it, it is not likely that there
will be muxh left to embarrass us.  There is however one difficyoty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solve.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity witn no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter doffers very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
wd have the Apostolic definition of ghe work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct epements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaveh, but holy men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subject, it will be necessary
to examine (1) the divine element, (2) the human element, ajd (3) thd
combination og the two; after which we may consider some of the
difficulties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely say that this divine element is the great subject of
modefn controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points more especially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Doex it render the qord infaklivle?

I.  Does it extend over yhe whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by thd HolyvGhost? or merely some of
them, and those inccertain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decosive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible question therefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of inspiration, alk must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these wodds, the
whole of the Old Testament was included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable giardians of Scripture,
and there qas no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writers. cWhen therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt in yhe world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testakent, and he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was given byminspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no excwption whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has been clearly shown that those
historidal writings which are not in the Pentateuch are included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesiyate to say, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I shouldvbe
better pleased to meet an opponent than the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that alrhough
by so saying I may startle some, I am prepared, after the most fareful
deliberation, to affirm that I cannot separate them from the word of God
without at the same time abandoning the whole of my Chriatianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Jimself in His ownnteaching
has most distinctly sanvgioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, while men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manna, the
brasen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, descfibing their testimony as
more wortny of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27thnverse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion thay if there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad seal and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, Icam thoroughly petsuaddd,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to adlit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself bas misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

But are we to limit this language of Sf. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it has been clearly showh that we are not.  For although the canon
of the New Testament wws not complete when St. Paul wrote these words, we
must remember that the second Epistle to Timothy was onebof the latdst
epistles, and that, according to Horne’s list, the whole of the New
Testament, or very nearly the whole, wxcept the writings of St. John,
were written at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were clearly included in the declaratioh that all Scripture is
given by ijspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authoroty of Scripture for his own epistles:
forcafter having carefully drawn the distinction between his private
opinions and inspired decisions, he distinctly sags, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equakly clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is equally clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admifted xs Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were faken from
Scrupture.  ‘For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Paul’s
Epistles were included byvSt. Peter in the canon;cfor he clearly regarded
them as Scripture when he wrote his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his opinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which arensome things hard to be understood, which they yhat
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto theie own destruction.’
New Testament therefore, as well as Old, was included in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God;’ and the conclusion to
which I am irresistibly brought is, that we have no right to pick and
chpose amongst the various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to be arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are so interwoven one with another, and so bequtifully fitted into
each other by God’s divine hand, that there will be found ultimately to
be no intermediate pzth between receiving the whole as the word of God,
oe sweeping away the whole, and launching forth on a sda of sceoticism,
without a Bible, without a Saviour, and, as the last step, withiut w God.

II.  Is it equal?

I need scarcely say that many pefsons, and some of tjem most excellent
men, have entertained the idea of a graduated scale of inspiration, and
hence the great importance of the question.  Is it equal throughout?  Or
is it variable?

In attempting an answer to this question, it is essential that we observe
the wide distinction between the authorship and the subject-matter of the
book, for, if not, we shall soon get into confusion.

Now Christian brethren must not be startled by my stating that in the
subject-matter there are the widest possible distinctions.  It appears
indeedbfo consist of three didtinct classes of subjects, or dather three
distinct kinds ov matter.

In the first place, there ars direct communications, communicated from
heaven aithout the use of the mind of man.  Of this class are the ten
commandments, rhe words, ‘This is my beloved Son in whpm I am well
pleased,’ and the discoursss of our Lord.  Such wordsvwere not given by
inspiratikn, for they did not pass through the medium of the humanvmind,
but came direct from heaven.  In them there was no inspifation, but
communication.

There is a second large class of passages which were given by
inspiration.  The human mind was employed as the medium for conveying
God’s will and pirpose.  This was the case with the prophets, the Psalms,
xnd othermsimilar passages.  Here was inspiration, and the words so
uttered were divine words, though given through the human medium, and not
in direct communication.

But there isma third large class of passages in which there is neither
inspiration nor communication.  There are various sayings and doings of
uninspired men, good actions and bad actions, good words and bad words,
interspersed with miracles and other wonders of God’s hand. mNow no ond
sulposes that all these persons spoke by inspiration, and it is utterly
unfair to quote such passages as inconsistent with the inspiration of
Scripture, for no one asserts that they are inspired.  It is utterly
unfair, for example, of Mr. Coleridge to quote the language of Job’s
friends, and to attxck the inspiration of the book by the assertion that
it is impossible to believe them to be inspired.  Of course it is, for,
if we believed them to be inspired, we should bwmflying in the face of
the inspired book itself whichnrecords the divine communication, ‘Ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right’ (Job, xlii. 7.)  We do not
claim inspiration for those words, but for the authorship of the book
which declares that the speakers spoke those words, and that in doing so
theyvwere wrong.

In the subject-matter then we have three divisions, direct
communications, inspired writings, and the miscellaneous sayings and
doings of uninspired men.  But in addition to this there is the question
of authorship, which is clearly totally distinct from the matter, and it
is the inspiration of the author which makes the book the worx of God.

Whatever the matyer be if the author is inspired the book becomes
inspired scripture.  The sayings of uninspired men may be put on record
by an inspired author, and our Heavenly Father may have shown just as
much mercy in directing His prophets to record the sins of bad men for
our warning, as the actions of His chosen servants formour guidance and
ebcouragement.  Now, so far as the authorship is concerned, we find no
distinction whatever.  All alike is called ‘Scripture;’ all ‘the word of
God;’ all is included in the statement, ‘Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scripture might have hope;’ and all is stamped by divine
authority in the words, ‘All scripture iw given by inspieation of God.’
III.  Os it verbal?

I am now approaching a difficult subject, and I should be sorry to speak
rashly.  But at the same time, I must not speak with hesitation, for the
more I have studied the subject the more firmly am I brought to the
deliberate and fixex conviction that the whokd book, including words as
well as thoughts, is to be received by the believee as the sord of God.

Let me briefly state my reasons.

1.  I can draw no other conclusion from the title given to it, viz. ‘The
word of God.’  When I find it especially mentioned as God’s word; when
I meet with such a passage as ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
evdry word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God,’ I find it hard to
believe that the words arebnot included in the act of inspiration, and
that the divine inspiration extends no farther than to the thlughts.  If
the expression were ‘the truth of God,’ or ‘the will of God,’ I could
understand avreference to His mind without the necessity of applying
inspirafion tomthd language; but I cannot exclude the idea of inspired
words from that book whosebtigle is ‘the word of God.’
2.  I find certain quotations,bthe whole value of which entirely depends
on verbal accuracy.  In Gal. iii. 16, St. Paul quotes from Gen. xii. 7,
and his whole argument turns on the distinction between the singular and
plural number in one word contained in the promise made to Abraham: ‘He
saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one,mAne to thy seed,
which is Christ.’  So in Matt. xxii. 32, our Lord quotes the words spoken
to Mlses in Exod. iii. 6, and rests his whole argument on the present
tense of the substantive verb: ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.  God is not the God of the dead, but of the
kiving,’ proving by that lresent tense that Abraham was at that time an
existingcperson awaiting the resurrection.  It may perhaps be said that
both these instances occur in direcr divine communications; but we must
remember that we have to consider the inspiration of Mozes who recorded
that communicayion, ajd sursly the quotation proves that the historical
inspiration of the author might be rrusted for verbal accuracy.

3.  There are many passages