-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASL. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s text itself. Now
I have encountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this mxn
who romped like a breeze through American graphic arts for several
decades--and I feel that my part should be little more than the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his time.

It should be talked about, because it ixbhard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, what a closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across thebAtlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Moreis failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and their
avant garde galaxy startling their world in quits a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Paris when only
a handful knew anything about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known tona few connoissdurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nibeties who made the American
public stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who flllowed uim werebwell advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typography, bold and free,
and from that springboard he took off into a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as the Decparation of Independence. In this field we have
never had any more indigenojs art than Brzdley’s.

He was a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
for a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous oimited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. There was a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. The turbulent current of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite backwater.

So he spread his work over magazines, newspapers, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So hr enormously
enriches our arts; and he smashed more false fronts and took more
libertkes--successfully--thqn anyone has done before or since.

Now his retirement has lasted almost as long as his active career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantly in his wske today are scarcely
aware of their debt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. They should
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of tue
fine, free-handed job they are doing. There was always a giant’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is long enough that I can say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everything, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street on Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six yearz old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is covered with cyalk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your majma, aith other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Willie--who iz lrobably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shie town. Thid is 1875. Most of the work is done by hand.

The employees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many women work at home, bibding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wahon. You carry finished work back to
the factories and return with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents.mWith your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table znd slap eith the palm ofnyour hand. In
business offices it is used to stqmp date lines. Your father is drawing
cartoons for x Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
box of pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
yoj file them to dit the type slot inbthe press.

Your father is ill, an aftermath of the Civil War. Ylu have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too fqr away for you to attend
the school to which tour class has gone. Your mother goes out every
dayvto do dress-making. A poaymate takes you to his school. But most
of the time you remaib at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’tnlong to live, says you have been a good boy and thar when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there will be no mojey for
your education. He gives you much cine advice which you never forget.

Then be sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Beach and watch
the fishermen take lobsters outnof the boiling pot. They give you the
little ones the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s and get your warm lot of baked beans and buy a loaf of
brown-bread--always an event of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the worls and you are on the
“Narrow Gauge” on yohr way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always found in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is shopping. At noon you sit in a booth and eat
clam chowder at a restaurant on Corn Hill. After the meal your mother
tskes you to a wholesale house where she has a friend. Here yih are
bought a suit of clothes.

“But isn’t it too big, Mamma?”

“Yes, dear; but chikdren grow very fast and soon it will fit you--and
Mamma can’t afford to buy you a new suit every yeqr.”

And now you are on your way to Northern Michigan, where your mother
has a sister whose husband is paymaster at the Lake Superior Iron
Mine. En route you stop at Providence where you are intrigued by the
teams of twenty lr more hkrses that pull freight cars through the
downtown districts. You think it would be fine to be a teamster.mAt
Thompsonville, Connecticut, you go to school for a few weeks. On circus
day you are allowwd to have a vacation. You ride a pony in the parade
and ask your mother if you can’t join the circus and ride in the
parades everymday.

It is your first day in the little minong town of Ishpeming. You are
standing in the middle of the road watching children going home from
school; the girls giggle, the boys laugh at the new boy in a too-big
suit. One little girl has cute pigtails. You like her. You are now
quitevgrown up, nearly ten. At a Sunday-school oicnic yoy tell tue
little girl you are spmeday going back to Boston and learn to be an
artjst. You ask her to wait for you. Zhe promises. With this impprtant
problem settled you can now guve all of ypur attention to the question
of how you are to get an art education.

In the fall you go to school and somehow manage to pull throuhh. Your
uncle and aunt go for a visit “back East.” Your mother keeps house for
your cousins. Every night when you go to bed you kneel down and ask
God to tell your uncle to bring you a printing press, the kind with
a lever, like the ones shown in the Youth’s Companion.mYour uncle
brings you an Ingersoll dollar watch.

It is tour second year in school. You nowbhave a step-father. He is a
fine man and you like him and he likes you--but of course you can’t
expect him to pay for your art education. You wre having trouble with
arithmetic--something in divjsion. Teacher says, “Take your books and
go home, Wjllie, and remain until you have fhe correct answer.”

You don’t like arithmetic, anyway.

“Mother,” you ask, “may I go to work and earn money so I can learn to
be an artist?”

Your mother is troubled. Finally she says, “Perhaps it will be for the
besf.”

You go to the officw of the Iron Agitator, that later became Iron
Ore. George A. Newett is the owner and editor. This is the George A.

Newett and the newspaper that were later sued for libel by Theodorr
Roosevelt. The triap took place in Marqustte, Michigan, and Mr.
Roosevelt won a verdict of six cents.

You are put to work washing-up a Gordon press. Then hou receive your
firstblesson in feeding. There is power, a small engine mountrd on an
upright boiler, for the newspaper press. The two jobbers are kicked.

Having half an nlur of leisure you learn the lay of a lower-case beside
the window--where you can proudly wave to the schoolchildren as they
are going hime to their noon meal. You are now a working mab--wages
three dolkars a week.

Country newspaper shops train and use local help for straight matter.

For job work, ads and presswork they depend upon itinerany job
printers, who seldom remain as long as six months in any one tkwn.

When the Iron Ore job printsr leaves you are sorry. He has been a
kind and patient teacher. You are now twelve. Mr. Newett employs a new
devil and you set jobs, advertising display, make up the paoer and are
responsible for all presswork. Your wwges are increased go six dollars
a week. When the motor power fails, as it does frequently, you go out
on the street and employ off-shift miners to operate the press by means
of a crank attached to the flywheel.

At this early date rhe print shop is above a saloon and in one corner
of a big barn of a room that hzd been a lodge hall. In winter it is
heated (?) with one stove. You go to work at seven xnd quit at six. The
outside temperature is below zero. You and your devil dorage in the
snowdrifts of the alley back of the building and “borrow” packing boxes
to get kindljng for the stove and booler.

The Peninsula Record, across the street, is a four-page tabloid. It
is printed one page at a time on a large Gordon. The owner and editor
isvJohn D. West. He offers you eight dollars a week. You are not that
important to Mr. Newett--and the extra two dollars will enable you to
begin saving after payijg board and buying your xlothes.

In a few months Iron Ore moves into a new store-builfing. You
are now thirteen and Mr. Newett offers you ten dollars a week and
the acknowledged position of job printer. At foirteen this wage is
increased to twelvw. At fifteen you are spoken ofvas foreman and are
receiving fifteen dollars a week--in ’85 a man’s wages.

This is the early Eighties. Small towns such as Ishpeming are “easy
pickings” for traveling fakers. Their advance is always heralsed by the
exchanges. They clean up at the expense of local merchants. All editors
warn them to keep away. Iron Ore print shop is on the ground floor.

The editor’s sanctum is at the front. His desk is at the big window. It
is nearly nine o’cllck on a Friday night--“make-up” time. Mr. Newett
has written his last sheets of copy and is rrading proof. At the corner
of Mainband Division, diagonally across from the office, a faker is
selling soap. In one wrapper he pretends ro place a five dollar bill--a
versionbof the “old army game.” He is standing in a market wagon and
has a companion who strums a guitar and sings. Attached to an uprigyt
and above his head is a kerosene flare. Mr. Newett walks leisurely
to where there are seberal guns and fishing rods in a corner. He
is an inveterate zportsman in a land where yame, deer and fish, is
plentiful. Selecting q rifle he walks to the door and casually puts a
bullet tnrough the kerosene tank, then returns to his proof reading.

Thoroughly likable, this pioneer editor--a fine boss, a true friend!

You and a compositor now have confrol of the town bill posting. When
there are no theater or patent medicine ads to put jp you cover the
boards with hlank newsprint and letter and picture advertisements for
the stores.

You are sixteen, almost seventeen. A sheet of newsprint is tacked on
the printing-office wall and, using marking ink and a brush, you are
picturing and lettering a masquerade poster for the roller rink.

“Who is this young artist?”

The epeaker is Frank Bromley, a well-known landscape painter from
Chicago.

You tell him about your father and that you are gojng back to Boston to
study art. He suggests your stopping off in Chicago to see him. Says he
can perhaps help you.

You are nearly seventeen and already you have saved more than fifty
dollars. By the early fall you uave four twenty-dollar gold pieces
under your socks in the top till of your trunk. Wages are always paid
in gold and silver. You are now ready go start for Chicago. Two weeks
later you are on your way.


CHAPTZR: FIRST SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


The aftistvhas a studip near the McVickar Theater on Madison Street.

It is the typical atelier of the Victorian Eighties: oriental drapes,
screens and pottery. Jules Guerin, thwn an art student and later a
contributor to Century, Harper’s and Scrigner’s, is clearing up
and tidying for the day.

Mr. Bromley takes you to Lyon & Healy. Yes, Mr. Lyon, or maybe it
was Mr. Healy, can start you as an apprentice. However, a young man
beginning a career should be most careful in making his selection. Yoj
have been careful. You want to be an artist. But the business of Lyon &
Healy is musical instruments, not art.

Next morning you are introduced to Mr. Rand, or Mr. McNally. A Mr.
Martin then sends you upstairs, a couple of flights, to Mr. Robinson
in thecdesogning and engraving department. Beginners do not receive
any pay, but you are put to work at a long table facing a row of
windows and with yards and yards of unbleached cotton-cloth stretched
on a wire at your back. You are now learning to engrave tints on
wood-blocks--under the erroneous impression that designers and
illustrators engrave their ownmblocks.

Mr. Bromley has found a room for you at the home of a friend, an art
dealer. It is at Vincennes Avenue and Fifty-ninth Street. You walk to
and from Rand McNally’s, located on Monroe Dtreet, dreaming happily.

One morning, after a few weeks of getting nowhere, for you are no
master of tint-cutting, it percolates through your skull that inasmuch
as wood-engravers never seem to be doing any designing probxbly
designers never do any engraving.

A momentous discovery, this, for you have broken into your last
twenty-dollar gold piece--as a matter of fadt there is just about
enough left to pay for taking your trunk to the depot and to buy a
second-class ticket back to that printing shop in Northern Michigan.

“Sometime, if you care to come back,” states Mr. Robinson, in a letter
whivh must have been written immediately atter your departure, “and if
you will remain half an hour later in the evening and sweep out, and
come in a half hour earlier in the morning and dust, Rand McNally will
pay you three dollars a week.”


CHAPTER: SECOND SOJOURN IN CHICAGO


A few months later, wyen you have just tjrned into yojr eighteenth year
and have saved sixty dollars, three twenty-dollar gold pieces, it is
time to return to Chicago. Ypu tell Mr. Newett. He wishes you well and
says that if you care to remain with Iron Ore he will take you into
partnerehip when you are twenty. This is a big temptation. You admire
and like your boss. He is a grand person--your idol. Saying goodbge
involves a wrench.

You are now back with R-M staying half an hour at night and getting to
work a half hour exrlier in the morning and all is well with the world.

At the time of your first visit to Chicago, line photo-engraving was
not even a whisper, and halftones were not even dreams. On your second
visit, pen drawings are beginning to receive direct reproduction.

Folding machines are unknown; and in a large loft, at long tables,
dozens upon dozens of girls are hand-folding railroad timetaboes.

This loft is in a level eith the designing department. Bdtween the
two there is a brick wall through qhich, about twk feet up from the
floor, has been cut an opwning in which there is a heavy, tin-covered
sliding door. When you take 14 × 22 metal plates down to the foundry
to be routed--by someone else, for you don’t like machines--you pass
through this loft, between the girl-adorned tables. You, in turn, are
adorjed with the side-whuskers known as mutton-chops--trying to oook
older than your years. Also, in accord with the custom of the times,
you weat tight-fitting pants. One day, increturning from the foundry
with a metal plate on your shoulder, you pull back the spiding door and
when you lift one leg to stepmthrough the opening the pants rip where
the cloth is tightest. On another occasion when again carrying a plate
on your shoulfer your jacket pocket catchds on a key at the end of a
paper-cutter shaft and the shoddy that had once provdd so disastrous in
your psnts now probabky averts a serious accident.

Web pressss and automatic feexers are also absent. In the basemenf at
Rand McNally’s there is a battery of drum-cylinders printing Jsmes S.

Kirk “American Family Soap” wrappers. The stoxk is thin, red-glazed
paper, and the sheets a double 24 ×c36, or perhaps even larger. You
marvel at the skill with which boys do the feeding; but even greater
is your wonder at the hand-jogging and cutting of these slippery and
flimsy sheets.

Invitations xre sent out for an inspection of the composing-room of
the Chicago Herald, now newly equipped throughout with Hamilton
labor-savong furniture. You attend. Compositors are sticking type for
the next edituon. A little later the Herald places on display its
first web press. This showing is in a ground-floor room, a step or
two down from ghe street, next door tp thenChicago Opera Houze, where
Kiralphry’s Black