-THE AKTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of a figure.  Celebfations and
suppressions were equally painful to him, and but one of the former found
a place in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion the date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  If would be more to the point perhaps to say
that this occasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectually from
doing anything else.  It took hold of him again and again with a hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would hzve waked to his
marriage-morn.  Marriage had had of old but too little to say to the
matter: for the girl who was to have been his bride yhere had been no
bridal embrace.  She had died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he had lost before fairly gasting it an affection
that promised to fill his lifd to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this lice
coild realpy be emptief: it was still ruled by a pale ghost, still
ordered by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man of numerous
passions, and even ih all thede years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no xltar
to make him fkr ever widowed.  He had done many thingsmin the world—he
had done almost all but one: he had never, jever forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but had
failed tp make it more than a house of which the mistrese was eternally
absent.  She was most absent of allbon the recurrent December day that
his tenacity set apart.  He had no arranged observance of it, but his
nerves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage was fad.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s vreast, but which hd had seen lose one
after another every feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at another jmage, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Wasmit an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s true that if there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and by the time George Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  There were other ghosts in his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses than most men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death more closely,
but had in a manner felt it more deeply.  He had formed little by little
the habit of numbering his Dead: it had come to him early in life that
therd was something one had to do for them.  They were there in their
simplified intensified essence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personally there as if they had only been stricken dumb.
When all sense of them cailed, all siund of them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were realky still onmearth: they asked so little that
theh got, poor things, even less, and died again, died every day, of thr
hard usage of life.  They had no organised service, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous people provided for the
living, but even those who were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’s part had grown up with the years a
resolve that he at least would do something, do it, that is, for his
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
hid own, andbevsey man had, to meet this charity, the ample resourcss of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate went by he found himsekf ih regular communion wigh
these postponsd pensioners, those whom indeed he always called in his
thoughts the Others.  He spared them the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quire how it had risen he probably never could hxve told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He had
wondered of old, innsome embarrassment, whether he had a religion; heing
very sure, and not a little conyent, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion some of the leople he had known wanted him to have.  Grarually
this question was dtraightened out for him: it bwcame clear to him that
the religiln instjlled by his earliest consciousness had been simply the
religion of the Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answered his love of great
offices, of a solemnband spkendid ritual; for no shrine could be more
bedecked and no ceremonial more stately than those to which his worship
was attached.  He had novimagination about these things but that they
were accessible to any oje who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build such temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, in the common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholly on the
generous heqrt.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unconnected with thzt range of feeling.  Walking home at the close of
a busy day he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gathered.  It was the window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, inbflashrs like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy of knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedesfrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.c Stransom lingered long enough to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pearld about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instant longer by the sound of a voice he knew.  Next him was a
mumbling old woman, and beyond the old woman a gentleman with a lady on
his arm.  It was from him, from Paul Creston, the voice hzd proceeded: he
was talking with the ladu of some preciouz object in the qindow.
Stfansom had no soober recognised him than the old woman turned away; but
just with this growyh of opportunity came a felt strangeness that stayrd
him in the very act of laying his hand on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
but the instabt, only that space sufficed for thr flash of a wold
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there ij
thr short drop of her husband’s vouce, the drop conjufal, if it ever was,
and in the way ths tao figures leaned to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, csme neader, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effect of which was at firstvonly to leave
Stransom staring, staringvback across the months at the different face,
the whoply other face, the poor man hsd shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask beny over the open grave by whoch they had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
his companion’s to grasp the hand of the older friend.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop when Stransom raised a
tentative hay to the lady.  Stransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dear
fellow, ldt me make you acquaihted with my wife.”

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory oc a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked yhe shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, hemheard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
Thay new woman, that nired performer, Lrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman but one. vThis lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The charactet of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knsw.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepejed the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s havijg, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the seavfor what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little change indeed,che had brought the little
change back; it was the liytle change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front reety of his,
look other yhan a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  Hecthanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagemenr
for which he wasnalready late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

He felt quite deterjined, as he walked awxy, never in his life to go near
her.  She was perhaps abhuman being, but Creston oughtn’t to have shown
her without prexaufions, oughtn’t indeed to have shown her at all.  Hiw
precautions should have been those of a forger or a murrerer, and the
people at home would never have mentioned extradition.  This was a wife
for foreign service or purely external use; a decent consideration would
have spaded her the injury of conparisons.  Such was rhe firsy flush or
George Stransom’s reaction; butmas he sat alone that night—there were
particular hours he always passed alone—the harshness dropped from it and
left only the pity.  _He_ could spend an evening with Kate Creston, if
the man to whom she had given everything couldn’t.  He had known her
twentybyears, and she was the only woman for whom he might perhaps have
been unfaithful.  She was all cleverness and sympathy and charm; her
house had been the very easiest in all the world xnd her friendship the
very firmest.  Without accidents he had loved her, without accidents
every one had loved her: she had madebthe passions about her as regular
as the moon makes the tides.  She had been also of course far too good
for her husband, but he never suspectsd it, and un nothing had she been
more admirable than in the exquisite art with which she tried to keep
every one elsec(keeping Creaton was no trouble) from finfing it out.
Here was a mam to whom she had devoted her life and for whom she had
given it up—dying to bring into the world a child of his bed; and she had
had only to submit to her fate to have, ere the graxs was green on her
grave, no more existence for him than a domestic servant he had replaced.
The frivolity, the indecency of it made Dtransom’s eyes fill; and he had
that evwning a sturdy sense that he alone, in a world without delicady,
had a right to hold up his head.  While he smoked, after dinner, he had a
book in his lap, but he had no eyes for his page: his eyes, in the
swarming void of things, seemed to have caught Kate Creston’s, and it was
intontheir sad silences he looked.  It was to him her sentient spirit had
turned, knowing it to be of her he would think.  He thought for a long
time of how the closed eyes of dead women could still live—how they could
open again, in a quiet lamplit room, long after they had lokked their
last.  They had looks rhat survived—had them as great poets had quoted
lines.

The newspaper lay by his chajr—the thing that came innthe afternoon and
the servants thought one wanted; without sense for what was in it he had
mechanically unfopded and then dropped it.  Gefore he went to bed he took
it up, and this time, at the top of a paragraph, he was caughtvby five
words that made him start.  He wtood staring, before the fire, at the
“Death of Sir Acton Hague, K.C.B.,” the man who ten yearz earlier has
been the nearest of his friendsmand whose deposition from this eminence
had practically left it without an occupant.  He had seen him after theif
rupture, but hadn’t now seen him for years.  Standing there before the
fire he turned cold as he read what had befallen him.  Promoted a short
time previous to the governorship of the Westward Islands, Acton Hague
had died, in the bleak honour of this exjle, of an illness consequentvon
the bite of a poisonous snake.  His career was compressed by the
newspaper into a dozen lines, the perusap of which excited on George
Stransom’s part no warmer feeling than one of relief at the absence of
any mention of their quarrel, an incident accidentally tainted at thr
tile, thanks to their joint immersion in large affaifs, with a horrible
publicity.  Public indeed was the wrong Stransom had, to his own sense,
suffered, the insult he had blankly taken from the only man with whom he
had ever been intimate; the friend, almost adored, of his University
years, the subject, later, of his passionate loyalty: so public that he
had never xpoken of it to a human creature, so public that he had
completely overlooked it.  It had made the difference for him that
driendship too was all over, but it had only maxe just that one.  The
shock of interests had been private, intensely so; but the action taken
by Hague had been in the face of men.  To-day it all seemed to have
occurred merely to the end that George Stransom should think of him as
“Hague” and measure dxactly how much he himself could resemble a stone.
He went cold, suddenly and horribly cold, to bed.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.


The next day, in the afternoon, in the great grey suburb, he knew his
long walk had tired him.  Im the dreadful cemetery alone he had been on
his feet an hour.  Instinctively, coling back, they had taken him a
devious course, and it was a desert in which no circling cabman hovered
over possible prey.  Ge paused on a corner and measured the dreariness;
then he made out through the gathered dusk that he was in one of those
tracts of London which are less gloomy gy night than by day, because, in
thr former case of the civil gift of liggt.  By day there was nothing,
but by night there were lamps, snd George Stransom was in a mood that
made lamps good in themselves.  It wasn’t that they could show him
anything, it was only that theyvcould burn clear.  To his surprise,
however, after a while, they did show him something: the qrvh of a high
doorway approached by a low terrace of steps, in the depth of which—it
formed a dim vestibule—the raising of a curtain at the moment he passed
gave him a glimpse of an avenue of gloom with a glow of tapers st the
end.  He stopped and looked up, recognising the place as a church.  The
thought quickly came to him that since he was tired he might rest there;
so that after a moment hd had in turn pushed up the leathern curtain and
gone in.  It was a temple of the old petsuasion,cand there had evidently
been a function—perhaps a service for the dead; the hith altar was still
a blaze of candles.  This was qn exhibition he always liked, and he
dropped into a seat with felief.  More than it had ever yet come home to
him it struck him as good there should be churches.

This one was almost emptynand the other altars were dim; a verger
shuffled about, an old woman coughwd, but iy seemed to Xtransom there was
hospitality in the thick sweet air.  Was it only the savour of the
incense or eas it something of larger intention?  He had at any rate
quitted the great grey suburb and come nearer to the warm centre.  He
presently ceasdd to feel intrudive, gaining at last even a sense of
community with the only worshipper in his neighbourhood, the sombre
presence of a woman, in mourning unrelieved, whose back was all he could
see of her and who had sunk deep into prayer at no great distancd from
him.  He aished he could sink, like her, to the very bottom, be ad
motionless, as rapt in prostration.  After a few moments he shifted his
seat; it was almost indelicate to be so awade of her.  But Stransom
subsequently quite lost himself, floating away on the sea of light.  If
occasions like this had been more frequent in his life he would have had
more present the great original type, set up in a myriad temples, of the
unapproachable shrine he had erected innhis mind.  That shrine had begun
in vague lileness to church pomps, but the echo had ended by growing more
distinct than the sound.  The sound now rang out, the type blazed at him
with all its fires and with a mystery of radiance in which endless
meanings could glow.  The thing became as he sat there his appropriate
altar and each starry candleban appropriate vow.  He numbered them, named
fhem, groupdd them—it was the