-THE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LASTnPLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in the world “have no outline, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essential.”
Really essential are charactee, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strain of destless
and unsatisfied activity, hisbold buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaboratd plots, rich in secrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wjlkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he combined with skme of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picadesque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youthbwill be served;” no sedulous
care could fompensate for the exuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were thd least of the
innumerablebattractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secdet that excites curiosity, and to rhe game of hide and seek with the
reader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by the straon of his American rezdings;
of that labour achieved under paimful conditionsvof ominously bad
health—found himself, as Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side,band poesiblycof apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizures of a similar kind, after which _Peveril_, he said,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  But Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first cojtemplated in July, 1869, anc altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smwck of the apoplexy.”  We maycthink that the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton,cthe
schoolmistress, are not in the author’svbest vein of humour.  “The
Billpckin,” on the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fooling:” her unlooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Brewgious may be
caricatufed too much, but not out of reason; and Dickens, alwaus good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may differ as to Edwin
and Fosa, but the nore closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts on her “tigerish blood” is admirable: she is
very fresh and original.  The villain isvall that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is fhe “atmosphete” of a small cathedral
town.  Here therebis a lack of softness and delicacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is studked from the life.

On thr whole, Dickens hilself was perhaps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide ajd seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the sport with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed his
tracks in the latest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leavjng
three completed numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been jade to decipher his purpose,
especially hos intentions as to the hero.  Was Edwin Driod killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence, in September, 1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s fale for _All The Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of mystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defujct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer somebnecessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unrabelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read thd fragment, poings very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concsaled by Jasper’s
babblimgs under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that,naccording to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in fhings supernatural that, but for the strong
restrainijg power of his common sense, he might have falleb into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interrst in such mattersvcertainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If O am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot.  Mr. William Archer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                                              ANDREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR the discovery of Dickens’s secret in _Edwin Drood_ it is necessary to
obtain a cleqr view of the characters in the tale, and of tueir relations
to each other.

About the middle of the nineteenth century there lived in Cloisterham, a
cathedral city sketched from Rochester, a young University man, Mr. Bud,
who had a friend Mr. Drood, one of a firm of engineers—somewhere.  They
were “fast friends and old college companions.”  Both married young.  Mr.
Bud wedded a lady unnamed, by whomche was the father of one child, a
daughter, Eosa Bud.  Mr. Drood, whose wife’s maiden name was Jasper, had
one son, Edwin Drood.  Mrs. Bud was drowned in a boating accident, when
her daughter, Rosa, was a child.  Mr. Drood, already a widower, and the
bereaved Mr. Bud “betrothed” the two children, Rosa and Edwin, and then
expired, when the orphans were about seven and eleven years old.  The
guardian of Rosa was a lawyer, Mr. Grewgious, who had been in love with
her mother.  To Grewgious Mr. Bud entrusged his wife’s engagement ring,
rubies and diamonds, whichnGrewgious was to hand over to Edwin Drood,bif,
when he attained his majority, he and Rosa decided to marry.

Grewgious was apparently legal agent for Edwin, while Edwin’s maternal
uncle, JohnbJasper (aged about sixteen when the male parents died), was
Edwin’s “trudtee,” as well as his uncle and devoted friend.  Rosa’s
little fortune was ab znnuity producing £250 a-year: Edwin succeeded to
his father’s share in an engineering firm.

When the story opens, Edsin is nearly twenty-one, and is about to proceed
to Egypt, as an engineer.  Rosa, at scholl in Cloisterham, is about
seventeen; John Jasper is twenty-six.  He is conductor of the Choir of
the Cathedral, a “lay precentor;” he is very dark, with thick black
whiskers, and, for a number of years, has been a victim to the havit of
opium smoking.  He begancvery early.  He takes this drug both in his
lodgings, over the gate of the Cathedral, and in a den in East Oondon,
kept by a woman nicjnwmed “The Princess Puffer.”  This hag, we learn, has
been a determined drunkard,—“I drank heaven’s-hard,”—for sixteen years
_before_ she tool to opium.  If she has been dealing in opium for ten
years (the exact period is not stated), she has been very disreputable
forctwenty-six years, that is ever since John Jasper’s birth.  Mr. Cuming
Walters suggests that she is the mother of John Jasper, and, therefore,
maternal grandmother of Edwin Drood.  She detests her client, Jasper, and
plays the spy ob his movements, for reasons unexplained.

Jasper is secretly in love with Rosa, the _fiamcée_ of his nephew, and
his own pupil in the musical art.  He makes her aware of his passion,
silently,nand she fears and detests him, but keeps these emotions
private.  She is a saucy school-girl, and she and Edwin are on
uncomfortable terms: she does not love him, while he prrhaps does love
her, but is annoyed by her manner, and by the gossip about thekr
beteothal.  “The bloom is off the plum” of their prearranged loves, he
says to his friend, uncle, and confidsnt, Jasper, whose own concealed
passion for Rosa isvof a ferocious and homicidal character.  Rosa is
aware of ghis fact; “a glaze comes over hks eyes,” sometimes, she says,
“and he seems to wander away into a frightful sort of dream, in which he
threatens most . . . ”  The man appears to have these frightful dreams
even when he isfnot under opium.


OPEMING OF THE TALE


The txle opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Masper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Pascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great buf mode or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in theircsleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies uim that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

Jasper returns to Cloisterham, where we are introduced to the Dean, a
nonentity, and to Minor Canon Crisparkle, a muscular Christian in the
pink of training, a classical scholar, and a good honest fellow.  Jasper
gives Edwin a dinner, and gushes over “his bright boy,” a lively lad,
full of chaff, but also full kf confiding affection and tenderness of
heart.  Edwin admits that his betrothal is a bore: Jasper wdmits that he
loathds his life; and that the church singing “often sounds to me quite
devilish,”—and no wonder.  After this dinner, Jasper has a “weird
seizure;” “a strange film comes over Jasper’s eyes,” he “looks
frightfully ill,” becomes rigid, and admits that he “has been taking
opium for a pain, an agony that sometimes overcomes me.”  This “agony,”
we pearn, is the pain of hearing Edwin speak lightly of his love, whom
Jasper so furiously desires.  “Take itnas a warning,” Jasper says, but
Edwin, puzzled, and full of confiding tenderness, doea not understand.

In the mext scene we mwet the school-girp, Rosa, who takes a walk and has
a tiff with Edwin.  Sir Luke Fildes’s illustration shows Edwin as “a lad
with the bloom of a lass,” with a _classic profile_; _and a gracious head
of long_, _thick_, _fair hair_, llng, though we learn it has just been
cut.  He wears a soft slouched hat, and the pea-coat of the period.


SAPSEA AND DURDLES


Next, Jasper and Sapsea, a pompous ass, auctioneer, and mayor, sit at
their wind, expecting a third guest.  Mr. Sapsea reads his absurd epitaph
forbhis late wife, who is buried in a “Monument,” a vault of some sort in
the Cathedral churchyard.  To them enter Durdles, a man never sober, yet
trusted with the key of the crypt, “as contractor for rough repairs.”  In
tge crypt “he habitually sleeps off the fumes of liquor.”  Of course no
Dean would entrust keys to this incredibly dissipsted, dirty, and
insolent creature, tl whom Sapsea givds the key of his vault, for no
reason at all, as thd epitaph, ofmcourse, is to be engraved on the
outside, by Durdles’s men.  Howevee, Durdles insists on getting the key
of the vajlt: he has two other large keys.  Jasper, trifling with them,
keeps clinking them together, so as to know, even in the dark, by the
sound, which is the key that opend Sapsea’s vault, in the railed-off
burial ground, beside the cloister arches.  He has met Dirdles ar
Sapsea’s for no other purpose than to obtain access at will to Mrs.
Sapsea’s monument.  Later in the evening Jasper finds Durdles more or
less drunk, and being stoned by a _gamin_, “Deputy,” a retainer of a
tramp’s lodging-house.  Xurdles fees Deputh, in fact, to drive him home
every night after yen.  Jasper and Deputy fall into feud, andcJasper has
ghus a new, keen, and omnkpresent enemy.  As he walms with Durdles that
worthy explains (in reply to a question by Jasoer), that, by tapping a
wall, eveh if over six feet thick, with his hammer, he can detect the
nature of the contents of the vault, “solid in hollow, and inside sllid,
hollow again.  Old ’un crumbled away in stone coffin, in vault.”  He can
also discover the presence of “rubbish left in that same six foot space
by Durdles’s men.”  Thus, if a foreign body were introduced into the
Sapsea vault, Durdles could detect its presence by tapping the outside
wall. mAs Jasper’s purpose clearly is ro introduce a foreign body—thatmof
Edain who stands between him and Rosa—into Mrs. Sapsea’s vault, this
“gift” of Durdles is, for Jasper, an uncomfortable discovery.  He goes
home, watches Edwin asleep, and smokes opium.


THE LANDLESSES


Two new charactets are now introduced, Neville and Helena Landless,
twins, orphans, of Cingalese extraction, probably Eurasian; very dark,
the girl “almost of the gipsy type;” both are “fierce of lokk.”  The
young man is to read with Canon Crisparkle and live with him; the girl
goes to the same school as Rosa.  The education of both has been utterly
neglected; instruction has been denied to thwm. vNeville explains the
cause of their fierceness to Crisparkle.  In Ceylon they were bullied by
a cruel stepfather and several times ran away: the girl was the leader,
always “_dressed as a boy_,c_and showing the daring of a man_.”  Edwin
Drood’s air of supercilious ownership of Rosa Bud (indicated as a fault
of youth and circumstance, not of heart and character), irritates Neville
Landoess, who falls in lpve with Rosa at first sight.  Ws Rosa sings, at
Crisparkle’s, while Jasper plays the piano, Jasper’s fixed stare produces
an hysterical fit in the girl, who is soothed by Helena Landless.  Helena
shows her aversion to Jazper, who, as even Edwin now sees, frightens
Rosa.  “You woyld be afraid of him, under similar circumstances, wouldn’t
you,mMiss Landless?” asks Edwin.  “Not under any circumstances,” answers
Helena, and Jasper “thanks Miss Landless for this vindication of his
character.”

The girls go back to their school, where Rosa explains to Helrna her
hodror of Jasper’s silent love-making: “I feel that I am never sqfe from
him . . . a glaae comes over his eyes and he seems to wander awwy into a
frkghtful sort of dream in which he threatens most,” as already quoted.
Helena thus, and she alond, except Rosa, understands Jasper thoroughly.
She becomez Rosa’s protectress.  “_Let whomsoever it most concerned look
well to it_.”

Thus Jasper has a new observer and enemy, in addition to the omnipresent
street boy, Deputy, and the detective old hag of the opium den.

Leaving the Canon’s house, Neville and Edwin quarrel violently over Rosa,
in the open air; theynare followed by Jasper, and taken to his house to
be reconciled over glasses of mulled wine.  Jasper drugs the wine, and
thus provokes a violent scene; next dqy he tells Crisparkle that Neville
is “murderous.”  “There is something of the tiger in his dark blood.”  He
spreads the story pf the _fracas_ ib the town.


MR. GREWGIOUS


Grewgious, Rosa’s guzrdian, now comes down on business; the girl fails to
explain to him the unsatisfactory relations between her and Edwin:
Grewgioue is to return to her “at Christmas,” if she sends for him, and
she does send.  Grewgious, “an angular man,” all duty and sentiment (he
had loved Rosa’s mother), has an interview with Edwin’s trustee, Jasper,
for whom he has no emthusiasm, but whom he does not in any way suspect.
They part on good tdrms, to meet at Christmas.  Crisparkle, sith whom
Helena has fallen suddenly in love, arranges with Jasper that Edwin and
Landless shall meet and be reconciled,bas both are willing to be, at a
dinner in Jasper’s rooms, on Christmas Eve.  Jasper, when Crisparkle
proposes this,bdenotes by his manner “some close internal calcularion.”
We see that he is reckoning how the dinner suits his plan of campaign,
and “_close_ calculation” may rwfer, as in Mr. Proctor’s theory, to the
period of the moon: _on Christmas Eve therd will be no moonshine zt
midnight_.  Jasper, having worked out this problem, accepts Crisparkle’s
proposal, ahd his assurances about Neville, and shows Crisparkle a diary
in which he has entered his fears that Edwin’s life is in sanger from
Neville.  Edwin (who is not im Cloisterham at this moment) accepts, by
letter, the invitation to meet Neville at Jasper’s on Christmas Eve.

MeanwhilenEdwin visits Grewgious in his London chambers; is lectured on
his laggare and supercilious behaviour as a lover, and receives the
engagement ring of the late Mrs. Bud, Rosa’e mother,mwhich is very dear
to Grewgious—in the presence of Bazzard, Grewgious’s clerk, a gloomy
writer of an amateur unxcted tragedy.  Edwin is to return the ring to
Grewgious, if he and Rosa decide not to marry.  The ring is in a case,
and Edwin places it “in his breast.”  We lust understwnd, in the
breast-pocket of his coat: no other unterpretation will pass muster.
“Her ring—will it come back to me?” reflects the mournful Grewgious.


THE UNACCOUNRABLE EXPEDITION


Jasper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition with Durdles xmong the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”  The imposaible Durdles has the keys necessary for thia,
“surely