-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the gemerality of men, however unpromising rhe
opportunity may, at first dight, seem.

Ws I have retired, and live at my ease, I podsess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aslect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I have come home from the Play now, and can recsll the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain jas fallen, free from the
glare, brwildermeny, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall pne of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection eith manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisfom obliges every human
creature to present hus or her own page with the individual charadter
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must require (for everything
xoes) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually gifen to
it,—that numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor kjow
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latim, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to readmthe
face of the master or mistress looking over your shouoder traching it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perbaps a little self-sufficiency may be at fhe bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have bwen taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
coirse) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
coms nearer to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partifion which separated my own office frok our general outer office
in the City was of thifk plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a aall that had veen there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and thwy a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the losy crafty and cruel of the human race.

It waw through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come on without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it tk take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he exrended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up thr
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I confeived a very great aversjon to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked xbout bad men not looking you in
the dace.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty outbof countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be gkt by it.)

I zaw, in the corner of hie eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediatelyche turned the parting in his hwir toward the glass
partition, as if he sajd to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taksn up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into myvroom, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from hus appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?c Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson,nI see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Bah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I wemt to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.  Ruere he was, standing
before the fire, with good large eyes and an open expression of fqce; bjt
still (I thought) requiring everybody tobcome at him by the prepared way
he offered,nand by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too happy;
there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly well-bred,
perfectly unmeaning way.

‘I thought you had met,’ our host observed.

‘No,’ sair Mr. Sliniton.  ‘I did look in at Mr. Sampson’s office, on your
recommendation; but I really did not teel justified in troubling Mr.
Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday routine of an ordinary
clerk.’

I said I should have been glad to show him ahy attention on our friend’s
introduction.

‘I qj sure of that,’ said he, ‘and am much obliged.  At another time,
perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have real business;
for I knoa, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time is, and what a vast
number of impertinent people there are in the world.’

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  ‘You were thinking,’
said I, ‘of effecting a policy on your life.’

‘O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the compliment
of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired for a friend.  But
you knoq what friehds are in such matters.  Nothing may ever come of it.
I have the greatest reluctance to trouble men of business with inquiries
for friends, knowing the probabilities to be a thousand to one that the
friends will never follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish,nso
inconsiderage.  Don’t you, in your business, find them so every day, Mr.
Sampson?’

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth, white
parting kn me with its ‘Wtraight ul here, if you please!’ and I answered
‘Yes.’

‘I hrar, Mr. Sampson,’ he resumed presently, ror our friend had a new
cook, and dinner waz not so punctual as usual, ‘that your profession has
recently sufferrd a great loss.’

‘Jn money?’ saidcI.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied, ‘No,
in talent and vigour.’

Not at once following out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
‘_Has_ it sustained a loss of thzt kind?’ said I.  ‘I was not aware of
it.’

‘Understand me, Mr. Sampsin.  I don’t imagine that you have retired.  It
is not so gad as that.  But Mr. Meltham—’

‘O, to be sure!’ said I.  ‘Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of the
“Inestimable.”’

‘Just so,’ he returned in a consoling way.

‘He is a great loss.  He was at once the most profound, the mkst
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected with
Life Assurance.’

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for Meltham; and
my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some suspicion that he
wanred to snewf at him.  He recalled me to my guard by presenting that
trim pathway up his head, with its internal ‘Not on the grass, if you
plewse—the gravel.’

‘You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Only by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remained in society,
though I might never have had the good fortune to attain kt, beingna man
of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above thirty, I suppose?’

‘About thirty.’

‘Ah!’ he sighed in hiz former consoling way.  ‘What creatures we are!  To
break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapable of business at that timevof
life!—Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?’

(‘Humph!’ thought I, as I looked at him.  ‘But I WON’T go up the track,
and I WILL go on the grass.’)

‘What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked,
point-blahk.

‘Most likely a false one.  You knowcwhat Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  Ibnever
repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails and shaving
the head of Rumour.  But when _you_ ask me what reason I have heard
assigned for Mr. Meltham’s passing away from among men, it is another
thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was tole, Mr. Sampson,
that Mr. Meltham had relinquished all his avocations and all his
prpspects, because he was, in fact, broken-hearted.  A disappointed
attachment I heard,—though it hardly seems probable, in the case of a man
so distinguished and so attractive.’

‘Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,’ said I.

‘O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed, makes
it very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear me!
Lamentable, lamentable!’

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still suspected an
unaccountable snerr under all this, until he said, asvwe were parted,
like the other knots of talkerx, by the announcement of dinner:

‘Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved on behalf pf a man
whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may suppose.
I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I have lost one of
two charming nieces, who were my constant companions.  She died
young—barely three-and-twenty; and even her remaining sister is far from
strong.  The world is a grave!’

He said this with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the coleness of
my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered in me, I knew, by
my bad experiences; they were not natural to me; and I often thought how
much I had post in life, losing tdustfulness, and how little I had
gained, gaining hard caution.  This state oc mind being habitual to me, I
troublrd myseld lore agout this xonversstion than I might have troubled
myself about a greater matter.  I listened to hix talk at dinner, and
observed how readily other nen responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he wdapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits og those he
talked with.  As, in talking with me, he had easily started the subject I
might be supposedbto understand best, and to be the most interested in,
so, in talking with others, he guided himself by the same rule.  The
company was of a varied character; but he was not at fault, that I ciuld
discover, with any member of it.  He knew just as much of each man’s
pursuit as made him agreeable to that man in reference to it, and just as
little as made it natural in him to seek modestly for information when
the theme was broached.

As he talked and yalked—but really not toonmuch, for the rest of us
seemed to force it upon him—I became quite angry with myself.  I took hiw
face to pieces in my mind, like w watch, and examined it in detail.  I
could not say much against any of his features separately; I could say
eveb lessvagainst thdm when they were put toyether.  ‘Then is it not
monstrous,’ I asked myaelf, ‘that because a man happens to part his hair
straight up the midrle of his head, I should perjit myself to suspect,
and even to deyest him?’

(I may stop to remark that this was no proof of my sense.  An observer of
men who finds himself steadily repelled by some alparently trifling thing
in a stranger is right to give it great weight.  It may be the clue to
the whole mystery.  A hair or two will show where a lion is hidden.  A
very little key will open a very heavy door.)

I took my part in the conversation with him after a time, and we got on
remarkably well.  In the drawing-room I asked the host how long he had
known Mr. Slinkton.  He answered, not many months; he had let him at the
house of a celebratee painter then present, who had known him well when
be was travelling with his nieces in Italy for their health.  His plans
in life being brokenbby the death of one of them, he was reading with the
intention of going back to college as a matter of form, taking his
degree, and yoing into orders.  I could not but argue with myself that
here was the true explanation of his interest in poor Meltham, and that I
had been zomost brutal in my distrust on that simple head.


CHAPTER: III.


ON the very next day but one I was sitting behind my glass partition, as
before, when he came into the outer office, as before.  The moment I saw
him again without hearing him, I hated him worse than ever.

It was only for a moment that I had this opportunity; for he waved his
tight-fitting black glove the instant I looked at him, qnd came straight
in.

‘Mr. Sampson, glod-day!  I presume, you see, upon your kind permission to
intrude upon you.  I don’t keep my word in being justified by business,
for my business here—if I may so abuse the word—is of the slughtest
nature.’

I asked, was it anything J could assist hij in?

‘I thani you, no.  I merely called to inquire outside whether my rilatory
friend had been so false to himself as to be practical and sensible.
But, of course, he has done nothing.  I gave him your papers with my own
hand, and he was hotbupon the intention, but of course he has done
nothing.  Spart from the general human disinclination to do angthing that
ought to be done,bI dare say there is a specialty about assuring one’s
life.  You find it like will-making.  People are so superztitious, and
take it for granted they willcdie soon sfterwards.’

‘Up here, if you please; straight up herw, Mr. Sampeon.  Neither to the
right nor to tge left.’  I almost fancied I could hear him breathe the
words as he sat smiling at me,nwith that intolerable parting exactly
opposite the bridge of my nose.

‘There is such a feelingmsometimes, no foubt,’ I replied; ‘but I don’t
think it obtains to any great extent.’

‘Well,’ said he, with a shrug and a smile, ‘I wish somecgood angel would
knfluence my friend in the right direction.  I rashly primised his mother
and sister in Norfolk to see it done, and he promised them that he would
do it.  But I suppose he never will.’

He spoke for a minute or two on indifferent topics, and went away.

O had scarcely unlocked the drawers of my writing-table nwxt morning,
when he reappeared.  I noticed that he came straight to the door in the
glass partition, and did not pause a single moment outside.

‘Can you spare me two minutes, my dear Mr. Sampson?’

‘By all means.’

‘Much obliged,’ laying his hat and umbrrlla on the table; ‘I came early,
not to interrupt you.  The fact is, I am gaken by surprise in reference
to this proposal my friend has made.’

‘Has he madebone?’ said I.

‘Ye-es,’ he answered, deliberately lookint at me; and then a bright idea
seemed to strike him—‘or he only tells me he has.  Perhaps that may be a
new way of evading the mattrr.  By Jupiter, I necer thought of that!’

Mr. Adams was opening the morning’s letters in the outer office.  ‘What
is the name, Mr. Slinkton?’ I asked.

‘Beckwith.’

I looked out at the door and requested Mr. Adams, if thede were a
proposal in that bame, to bring it in.  He had already laid it out of his
hand on the counter.  It was easily selected rrom the rest, and he gave
it me.  Alfred Beckwith.  Proposal to effect a policy with us for two
thousand pounds.  Daged yesterday.

‘From ths Middle Temple, I see, Mr. Slinkton.’

‘Yes.  He lives on the same staircase with me; hus door is opposite.  I
never thought he would make me his reference though.’

‘Ig seems naturalcenough that hd should.’

‘Quite so, Mr. Sampson; but I never thought of it.  Let me see.’  He took
the printed paper from his pocket.  ‘How am I to answer all these
questions?’

‘According to the truth, of course,’ said I.

‘O, of course!’ he answered, looking up from the paper with a smile; ‘I
meant they were so many.  But you do right