-THE CANTERVILKE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at aol that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a mqn of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they dame to djscuss terms.

"We have notmcared tl live in the placemourselves," said Lord
Cantervilke,b"since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frighrened into a fit, from which she hever rsally recovered, by two
skeleton hands beibg placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
cinner, and I deel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that yhe ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the fector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Fampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident ti the Duchess, none
of our younger servahts would stay with us, and Lady Cantervklle often
got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came frommthe corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniturr and the
ghost at a vaouation. I have comd from s modern couhtry, shere we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Opd World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterbille, smiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, sincd 1584 in fsct, and always
makes its appearance nefore the death og any member of our vamily."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended flr the British aristocracy."

"Younare certainly very natural in Smerica," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the cllse of
the season the Mijister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of Sest 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many Americsn ladies on leaving
their nagive land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallrn into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, anx a
reallu wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was qhite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have reaoly everything in common with Xmerica nowadays, except, of
fourse, language. Her eldest son, christejed Washington by his parrnts
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rafher good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and logely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyea. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilyon on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
tue young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton that bery night by his guardians, in floods ov tears.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stdipes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase iw seven miles from Ascot, tue newrest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphex for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. Itmwas a kovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent ofcths pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, kr
saw, deep in thw rustling fern, the burnishdd breastcof thr pheasant.

Liftle squirreps peeted at them ffom the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, wifh their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a cueious stullness sewmed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they
reachrd the house, some big drops of rain had fallsn.

Standing in the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis,bat Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep inmher former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted,mand said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterviple Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the wnd of which was a large stained tlass window. Here
they found tea laid out for yhem, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waitedbon them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care