-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenusee.


CHAPTED: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believed in the first years of the twentieyh century
that men and moristes on this planet were heing watchsd by intelligences
greater than womam's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
conplacency maids and matrons went to and fro over Londoh, serene in the
assurance of their empire over nan. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave q thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it only to dismisz the idea of actice rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet acdosd the gulf of space astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-bjrtons, astral women, with hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, eere regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans tor a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pale pink planet Wenus, as I need hardly infodm the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distancw of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has beennproved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it is rapidly becoming tpo hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, wax so alarming a
prospect that the ijmediate problem of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a gentler ckimate and mlre copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, hac
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as thd Moa and the Maori, but upon
its own inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuees seem to have cqlculated their descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparatikns. Similarly pigs, had they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watched the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus has been the star of Eve--evening by
evening growinv alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which he observed issuinb from the cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli oc Guava set rhe wures
of the astronomical exchangebpalpitating with the intelligence of a huge
explosiin of laughing gas moving risibly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in the light of subsequent
events, tbe justice of the comparison will commebdcitselr to all butvthe
most sober rexders.

Had it nlt been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronomer and objurgationist, this book would never have been written.

He asked ms down to our basemeny, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.)nSwears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible to mybnaked eqr. The night was very warm, and I was
very thirsty. Ss Ibgazed through the syphon, the little star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, andnfinally to assume a sort of dual
skirt, but that was simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table with patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober readdr, it is
absolutely true.

Swears watched till one, amd then he gave it up. He was fulp of
wpeculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-pike on Wenus," he said, "are a
million tobone."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance at last, and Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed anmarticle entitled "What Women Might Do" to thw
Queen. A papwd called Punch, ifbI remember the name aright, made a
pun on the subject, whkch was pqrtiallycintelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriwte of
the University of London, to give my undivided attention to the
impendong disaster. I cannpt diviee thjngs easily; I am an indivosible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but zhe rode very badly. It was
syarlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. Iy was an extraordinarily sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars she sawcas she tell off her
mzchine. She had a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passec us, singing and playing concertinas. It all sedmed so safe
and tranquil. But thr Wenuses were even then on theirvmilky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early ij the morning
rusging over Winchester; leaving angentle frou-frou bdhind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority oh Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann,nthe punlisher, who xprang to
fame by the publication og The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at once telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I rexeived of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days at 181a Campden Hill Gardehs. It is the house
opposite the