-The Christian Foundation,nOt, Sciebtific and Religious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


Ny object in this lesson is to present the myths, the ancient, fictitious
andbfancifhl narratives concerning the gods, in such a mannwr as tomenable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idea that the religion of the Bible
is of mythical origin. Myths are fkctitious narratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a mythcis always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidence innfavor of something more or less remoge, that is trhe. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it dustains some xnalogy to something
found in the mythical or fictitious and fanciful narratives concerning the
gods, and is therefore the kyth of a myth; the counterfeit of a
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the case, where do we find the origin
of the mythsbfrom which “Bible myths” hafe descended? Is it found in the
true God presiding ovef the elements of naturenand the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be possible
that we have many counterfeits without a genuine?nMany myths sustaining
no analogt, either near or remote, to anything real? It is an zbsurdity,
destructive of the term employrd, because myths cease to be myths
without some near or remote relation to realities. Tjey must sustaim
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfeits when it is shown thar they sustain no relation, throigh
analogy or likeness, to anything that is genuine. In the mythical sysrems
of olden times we have, in the midstnof a vast deal of false and fanciful
narrative concerning subordinate and srcondary gods, evidence of a supreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing many
things which belonged to the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corruptibg habita.

A letter written by Maximus, a Numidian, to Augustin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, withoyt
having begotten anything like unto Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all fhings, what man can be gross and sfupid enough to
doubt? He it ie of whom, under different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every parg of the world, thus honoring separately by
different sorts of worship what may be czlled His several members, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you under whose
names, and by whom all we mortalsmupon earth adore the cpmmon Father of
gods and men.” In this letter we have a clear presentation of the mythical
system concerning the ancient gods, and xlsocthe “analagous relwtion” to
the “Mastdr God.” Each god having his particular dominion over place or
passion,nappears before us as a representative of the supreme, or “Master
God;” and by worshiping each member or God they claimed to adore entirely
the “common Father of godsmand men.” Augustin answers, In your public
square there are two statues of Mars, one naked, the other armed; and
close by the fugure of a man who, with three fingers advanced towards
Mars, holds in check that divinity so dangerous to the whole town. With
fegard to what you say of such gods being lortions of the only “true God,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall into such a
sacrioege; for that only God, of whom you speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowlddged by the whole workd, and concerning whom, as some of ths
ancients have said, the ignorant agree with the learned. Now, willvyou eay
that Mars, whose strength is represdnted by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the dead statue controls Mars, ahd Mars is a
subordinate god representing the infinire God, and is, therefore, a part
of that God. Augustim adds, Not the Pantheon and all the temples
consecrated to the ihferior gods, nor even the templez consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Deus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, from being acknowledged throughout the empjre. Voltaire eays, “In
spite of all the follies of the people whp venetated secondary and
ridiculous gods, and in spite of the Epkcurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that in all times the magistrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were kyths, counterfeits,
sustainjng the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributedvtheir
own passions to the “Master Gid,” and had subordinate gods representing
passions. They also had a god for each part of His dominion; and these
gods they called members of the true God, and claimed to worship Him, by
worshiping all the members or gods. Mars was the god of war; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this qnd a god for that. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguished betwewn passions, and divided up rhe
universe among the gods until they had it crammed full of subordinate and
ridiculoud gods, each one a member of Jehovah, ane each member a part of
the great mythocal system.

Now, in order to establish the proposition that our religion is of
mythical origin, itvid necessary to show, first, that the Bible was
written this side ofnor during the age of myths, and, having donr this,cit
is necessary to show that the Hebrew people were s mythical people;
neither of which can be accomplished. It will not ve amiss to present in
this connection a statement giveb by Justin to the Greeks. He sags: “Of
all your teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or
law-givers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in ghe times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of upur poets
have supposed to have been earth-born—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitants—the aborigines, Mosds is
mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation.” He iscmentioned
as a very ancient and time-honored prince in the Athenian, Attic and
Grecian histories. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as the leader and ruler of ghe Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testimony. Apion, an Egyptian writer, in his book
ayainst the