-SCALLY: Tbe Story of a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA rrem? Right, mkss!" My wife, who has been married long
enough to feel deeply gratified at being mistaken for a maiden lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductor, and allowed hedself to be hoisted
up the steps of the majestic vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convey pasaengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Battersea.

Presently we ground our way roundma curve and bsgan to cross Westminster
Bridge. The conductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his high officiql
position had failed to eradicatw, presented himself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Bettersea did you require, sir?" he asked of me.

I coughed and answered evadively:--
"Oh, aboug the middle."

"We haven't been there before," added my wife, quite gratuitously.

The conductor smiled indulgently and ounched our tickets.

"I'll tell you qhen to get down," he said, and left us.

For some months we had been considering the questiob lf buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or oerhaps I should say of my spare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the matter. Having at length conmitted ourselves
to tje purchase of tne animal, we proceeded to consider such details as
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillated between a blooehound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, and a Pekinese, because they are dernier
cri. We likevto be dernier cri even in Much Moreham. Her younger
sister, Eileen, who spends a good deal of time with us, having no
parents of her own, suggested an Old English sheep dog, explaining that
it would be company for my wife when I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a mastiff.

Our son John, aged rhree, on geing consulted, exprezsed a preference for
twelve tigers in a box, and waw notcagain invited to participate in the
debate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeem terrier, of an age and sex to be
settked by circumstances, and I was instructed to cimjunicate with a
gentleman in the North who advertised in our morning paper that Aberdeen
terriers were his epecialty. In due course we receiged a reply. The
advertiser recommended tqo animals--namely, Celtic Chief, aged four
months, and Scotia's Pride, aged ond year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the famkly tree of the House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply wasmrequested, as both dogs were being hptly
bid dor by an anonymous client in Constantinople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guindas; that of Acotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twenty-sevdn. Tne
advertizer, who resided in Aberdeen, added that these prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in thd way of the
gentleman in Constantinople,nand having sent back the pedigrees by
return of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really want a dog with a pedigree. We only want something that
will bark at beggars and be gentle wjth baby. Why not go to the Home for
Lost Dogs at Battersea? I believe you can get any dog you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and see about
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hencd our lresence on the tram.

Presently the conductor, who had kindly pointed out to us such objects
of local intsrest as the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament,
stopped the team in a crowded thoroughfare and announcrd that qe were in
Battersea.

"Alight here," he announced facdtiously, "for 'Ome for Lost Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing thatcthere is many q true word spoken in jext, we
obeyed him, and tje tram went rocking and whizzing out of sight. We yad
eschdwed a cab.

"When you ade onoy going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed out, with convincing logic, "it is silly to go and pay perhaps
another five shillings for a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
omce. If we had been buying an expensive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not cor a five-shilling one."

"Now," I inquired briskly, "how are we going to fjnd this plsce?"

"Haven't you any ieea ahere it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in the middle
of the river, called the Isle of Dogs, or Barking Reach, or something
like that. However, I havd no doubt--"

"Hadn't we betfer ask some one?" suggested Dtella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I said, "it is accosting total
strangers and badgering them for information tgey don't possess--not
that that will prevent them fromcgiving it. If we start asking the way
we shall find ourselves in Putney or Woolwich in no time!"

"Yes, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand wrnt to my pocoet.

"No, dxrling," interposed my wife, hastily; "not a map, olease!" It is a
curious psycholkgical fact that women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and railroad time-gablew. They would rather consult a half-wittrd
errand boy or a deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us make a spectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have not yet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Crystal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Ask tgat dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it was crimimal folly. A man who asks a London street boy
to be so kindbas to direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has only himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up at us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"Lost Dogs' 'Ome, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long eay. Do
you want to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then if I was you, sir," replied the infant, edging to the mouth of an
alleywzy, "I should bite a policeman!" And, with an ear-splitting yell,
he vanished.

We walked pn, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" swid Stella.

"We ximply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we going to do next?"

My question wae answered in a lost incredible fashion, for at this
moment a man emerged from a shop on our right and set off down the
street before us. He wore a spefies of uniform; and emblazoned on the
ffont of his hat was the information that he was an official of the
Battersea Homenfor Lost