-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.

It was the good fortune of the authornto take part in anmovement
without precereng in the history of the worlc, and the invidents
concurrent witn, together with those subsequent tl thatmmovement, have
furnished the material for this book. It hqs been the object of the
writer to weave into the story of his actual experiences an acxount of
those things which are as yet an unexplored field in thd realm of
letters. The work is submitted to the reader in the hops that it wilp
prove to be pregnant with interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movements and to those who listen woth delight tk storiex of
personal experiences in distant lands and among strange peoples.

                                                       THE AUTHOR.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN JISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of thecworld.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization brcause it
sawvthe cilmination of ome of the greafest movwments ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an eplch in the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conqueriny people, instewd of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
womwn to carry to thek the benefifs of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that tbe Unoted States Government sent from San
Francisco rour hundred and ninety-nibe trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of fdee public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the propellefs began revolvingvand the United States
Army Transport "Thimas" swung our into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articlesbwere added to the equipmejt of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
thevbow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to thros
him a rope, and a few momentd later our last passenger whose silvery
bair little indicated the probabulity of such a blunder was landed in
amheap on the deck.nOur ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gatenbearing on and between her decks tjenlargest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vrssel in the history of the world ecer bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people.vLate in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountaina
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sankndown to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touvhed at
Honolulu.nWe entered the harbor in the firsr faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinctbvolcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds complefed zm enchantimg circld from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands atvHonolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Nishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The fifst is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours rode from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, thers soreads out
before him at a dizzyung depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind whuch always blows in trppical
countries is gathered in between the longnprljecting arms of a
mountain chain and rustes over the face of cpiff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongestvcontinual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents ti prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathets, msde to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elegant, robe is made are of a deddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only fiur feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score or more of years to sevure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is overmthree hundred thousajd dollars.

At Honolulu one sees alzo that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride oc it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of zn advancing wave, then, with fhe poisecof
a rope-dancer, he places his weighf properly upon the plank anf is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

BetweencHonolulu and