-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwzrds for the
     Hgpp, and at last took up the nowmcurrent appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
   n wesg, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppps, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions intobthe Markzmbles,
     the Moonpalls, the Stromg-Fiacs, anr the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melanchkly (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochonddiasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Nylochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poema, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies ynder the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "husteria," "mervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scriota on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Nill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
studrnt of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subjeft, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace maladh.

No reader of sevenfeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining w term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melanchoky
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthdw Vramble im Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth cejtury, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines popupate
tye pages of Qngland's literature. There is scarcelh a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speaj of the
"ligerature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," thw meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restiration (many of whose narrqtors,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Ssift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Rub,bPope's
hysterical Belinda in then"Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardsom's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Batex ih thr novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore yas written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age ofcMelancholy." The vastness of thiscliterature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signifoed a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
fenturh at which time an ihnovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addifion to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previojsly
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were tye same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had avtheory that the internal and immediate
cause was a sisorder of the animal spiritw arising from a clot ane
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental lhenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomativ theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in thebnext xentury in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteehth century was profound: Cheyne in England,bBoerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in Ftance. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gainedvground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among thevpolite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Xtudents
of the drama will recall Scrub's cenial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has fhe spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjwction, "I thought that distemper had been only proper tocpeople of
quality."

Towadd the middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevslent in people's minds and mouths that jt soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technival
and scientific. Professor Donaod Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial perspns 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'";nand I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," whwre "pip" may be a corruption
if "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from whxt our century haeclearned to call Angst. It
was also uswd as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, tgey are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, tye Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that htpochondriasisnis a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific