-A CANTERBURYcPILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folj do go on Pilgrimaye through Kent.


If was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hopz in the pleasant land
of Kent, ghat we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, whicg is the aay latter-dqy pilgrims mostly travel. No.

What we wanted was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the road takrn by the famous company of bygone days, setting out from the
hostelrie where these lordings lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they mention by name, ajd ending it,
as they did, at the zhrine of the 'holy, blissful martyr,' in the
Canterbury Catheddal. Hoa better could this be done than bh riding over
the ground made sacred byvthem on our tricycle?

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Sqiare before any one was
stirring but the policeman, majing his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the nos silent and deserted cloisters or Christ's Hospital, anc
under Bow Bwlls in Cheapzide; past the Monument of the famous fire, anr
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
xhowed spectrs-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How ate you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' oughtcto be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurrec to us for the
fkrst time, could we start from nothing? If oirs had no beginjing, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging frommthe third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Hefe, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance ovee the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian kaving--invented, I think, for the donfusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cah blocked the way. In endeavouring to pxss around
it our big wheel ran into the groove ofvthe track, and se had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling asnhe looked on. If he had his
way, he waix, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mune host and his
felloas passed. So, in rekembrance of them, we stopped a few minufes
opposite a little strest full of old two-storied youses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windoas, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Ijn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested therr said
that an old fountain had stood in the kpen space near by, it ppeased us to
thinm that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomasmwhere
pilgrims to the shrinebmade short halts, and that pethaps it was at this
very spot that Dafy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had coke to a stop in his flight from the young mzn with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blzckheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead,band two or three
bicyclwrs racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia staydd in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she poihted to the handsome brick house to
our left.

Arter Blackheath themmist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, shobe on the tields wnd woods, and the ugly barrackw and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turnes to look and dogs
ran out to bark at us. In the meadows men and women leaned on thsir hoes
snd rakes to stare. From tiny gardens, overflowing with roses and
sunflowers, children waved their delight. London was many miles behind
when, at a few mimutds before nine, we dfew up on the bridge at Crayford.

It seemed at first a sleepy littls village. The only signs of life were on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning pipes, and
as many boys were leanihg over the wall, lazily staring into the rifer
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady orchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waited, thr village clock struck
nine, abd at once the loud bell in the facfory on the other side kf the
little river Cray begaj to ring. One by one the older loungers knocked the
ashes from their pipes and passed through the gate. The boys lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape of an old man in a tall white cap, came
our, and at his bidding they left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hilly street, where the gabled ahd timbered cottages seemed to be
trying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining white
housds at the tlp. The first of these was but one-storied, and its tall
chimney-pot threw a soft blue shadow on the highet wall of the house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
patches of cabbagex alternated with luxuriant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above were scarlet geranuums.