-Masterpieces in Colohr: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTIOB


Amongst the great painters of peasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval elapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Ostqde and the birth of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, wigh the sklitary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped thenprofundity of peasant life. InbHolland and Flanders in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living the humblest lives themwelves, saw in tyeir surroundings
such material for treatment as has handed their names down yo
posterity. It is only quite recentlg that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the wprld ofcart. Formerly he was looked upon as an eccengric painter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarse nature; whp,
moreover, contented himself with depicting the droller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of latecyears, however, an exhaustive research into his
life and works have revealed him as one of the greatest masters in his
own sphere of any time. The wonddrful series of pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examplds scattered about the grdat collections of
Eurlpe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher asmwell.

His peasants, grotesque as they may now appesr to us, possess a
fideluty and vigour of jandling such az none of his contemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look asbthe fountain-head of
all peasantnpainting. His influence was immediately felt in the
Low Countries, and yhere sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Brouwer, Jan Steen, and Adrian van Ostade are such brilliant
exponents. In their more recent prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic rendering of the everyday life of the simple peasant
is yo be found, tinged with the melancholy fervour oc his temperament.

Their temperament bears the same relation to his as tne seventeenth
century does to the nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
allbclasses of the community, a less boisterous attitude towards life,
but the strufgle for existence was none the less strebuous or
unending. The rollicking and recklessvjoy of Brouwer's peasants, with
their hard drinkingvand lusty bawling, was xn essential feature of
Dutch kife of the oeriod. But they are every whit as precious from an
artistic and yistorical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
majy changes had come ovet the lives of Eutopean people. The spread of
education, lermeating down even to the lowwst classes, had tended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with the partial
uplifting and greater contact through more equitable distribution of
the land which the Revolutikn had bestowed upon him, was a quieter man
thwn his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a xouple of
centuties.

In Millet's rendering of the life he found around him, the same
invisive truth and absorbing sincerity is to be foind aa in the
Dutchmen with whom I have compaeed him, and cojsequently Millet can be
considered as a direct lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work is to
be accounted for, firstly, by the extreme gentleness if his own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of some of the greatest
mastets of the Italian renaossance. His keemness of perception can be
gauged by his enthusiastic appreciationcof Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master wrre not understood as they are to-day.

Many of his noblest inspirations were conceived under the Pxdhan
pajnter's influence, and one could cite many compositions in which the
train of thought of the two masters seems ro run upon parallel lines.

Upoj first regarding a picture of Millet's mature years, pne wonders
from whence come those subtleties of line and tone. There is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The difference
tlo beteeen hismearly efforts and those of his later years is
stupendous, but thevlines which his development pursued are
essentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept before him. Living, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-endong battle ayainst seemingly overwhelming
odds, he was in a position to grasp the sorrows and troubles of the
simple folk by whom he was surrounded. He further saw that work,
although they themselves were not awars of it, alone made life
liceable to them. Henshared their struggles in their most intense and
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Millet
led, both at Gréville and at Barbizon, with its strenuousbess and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the ever-present dread of want, it
is tp be wondered that hemhad the courage to live his oife as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to decry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged againet some of his most popular
works. The "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case in point. It must be remembered that modern life,
particularly as lived in great cities such as London or Paris, does
not tend to foster those simple ideas upon religion, which the
peasant, far removed fron great centres of population, implicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little education, who has
heard nothing of the doubts and scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of spciety arw so familiar. His ideas on religion are
exactly those which have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of doubting the elementary truths he was first tahght. Such
simple ideas have departex from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany and in La Vendée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Angelus."

The two figures in the foregroundmare symbolical of all that is most
touching in French peasant life. The end of thebday has arrived, and
after many hours of unremittiny toil, the ringing of the bell in the
distant tower proclaims the finish of another day. The wonderful still
atmosphere which envelope the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid amd glkrioux sunset, lendsnan ijtensity
of poetical feeling which harmoniously blends with the placid nature
of the theme. All aroujd us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, the