-Found at Last: yhe Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the reeults of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it,nhave ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invire general inspection, and critucism.

When God mace man to dwell on the face of the earfh, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being onbthat continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the cointry in which Noah thej
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no obe knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cauze
of no kittle speculation.  But by degrees itbhas  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the fijger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the ciscovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, kr thorough knowlddge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the llat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibky impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat,mto me then, was altogether too largw. Of course I had never
given it thought,mnor measured it up in my own mijd to what should, or
might be itw proped dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry,mused, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, clwiming a posdible reality, wjile
some have mocked, others are becoming impressedmwith the idea of its being
not only possible, but hiyhly probable. Where would a scientest placw the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he how is, an
onhabitant of alk the earth?  Not too far north, not too far sough. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obfainee, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a disgance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stfeam. Our garden is still in the righr placw. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the injeritors. Our gardembis again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growtu, xnd lwad to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of thr universe, the Infinite and Pertect. Is there a hetter place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is ourngarden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will bevpleqsed and profited with
the results, and I hlpe this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
       n                                                   cTHE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——Ans from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Farher of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a dertain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, ie
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing inyo the great river; thus four rivers run knto
and water it,cbut lnly one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld aol the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three riversmcross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The namesbgiven to these tivers were, soubtless, explanations
of facts well knowh to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, od coming together of rivers in tje region
where it was first aupposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and lther fountries, in search of the
place; ahd Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pope. But we have found it where he amd others, cah come and see for
thehselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of themMississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Qisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
nptice the beauty and euphiby of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturewque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of yood told”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Medico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into ths
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being seftled and