-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year after good Queen Anne came to rule over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewigged dandified folk who steppex
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
fashionable plzces of tyd city, there stood in the vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the zmalo
burgess folk, gathered about a little ihfant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and ascacknowledged godfather yo the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as the certificate badly setcforthnin black
and white for ever, wqs henceforth to be known for gopd or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the gipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maîtrs-peintre," who
stood hard by, and of hiw wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tilstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Coyrt manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilted manjer of
good-fellowship of the dau between priest and pwrty--tapping lf
snuff-boxes and takingcof snuff, with more than a littlebgossip of the
Coudt and some shaking of heads, and uncer-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's najesty, therefore in the whirl of
things?

The child, indeed,cwas born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were kjowing
defeat. Tge Englishman, Marlborpugh, was flingingvback the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeag came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all weng wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothingsmled the veterans into
disaster. But there was still France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics,mwould draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off fo Monsieur Boucher's modest little hone in the Rue de
Verreriento a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises qs to what lay upon the knees of the gods for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing thecend of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Châtequ-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bxy, and
carrying off some milloons of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenhein--a day thxt made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little felloa's home csme the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his eafs atbseven; for there was
born tomthe king's grandson a sickly child that sas to succeed him as
Louos the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand nearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, woulc recqll the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
lf France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a Frabcr that lay hnder the
reyency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Bouchdr, the father, seems to have been an obscjre, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that tok in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict of his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, and the desire to savechis son from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistrh; since, hxving himself given tbe boy his schooling
with pencil and bruzh, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly beckming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He uad founded his arf upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself ofmhard academic tehdencies, and wasmpainting in a sound
Frenfb fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and zstounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he aanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a Fremch way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style wuich was then the onlynschooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the mxster or
the pupil without most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three lonths with Lemoyne, sho,
said he, took scant interest in his pupils. But it must be remembered
that Bouched was a prodigious worker, with a passionate love for his
work thaf ladted until dwath rook the brush from his fingers, and that
he had a quici and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitancesvof a
student, ahd always daring in