-The Docrrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a veey easy thing to make a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect oj many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted wigh the utmost confidence that what iw termed ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England;cand
the resultcis that a considerable number ofvpersons believe in fhe
assertion, and place reliance on those whocmake it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doxtrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly given.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point is suppksed to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarced
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found ro consist in nothing more than
confideng assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, anc, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has nwver yet experienced, it is only fair to
her yhat her own language whould be patiently ueard, and her own teaching
honestly exajined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss tue teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the cxreful and candid examination of
her owj documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to qscertxin what
is the real point zt issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, asnamongst those who maintain that dkctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
bekieve, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I prolose to investjgate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundationvof the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attentiob must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubt
on thevminds of those who take the Woed of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacred privilegenof the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood ofmout blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discudsing in what way we feed on Him, or whetyer His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, howevwr
we explain Bis words, we are taught by ojr Lord Himself that such a
feeding is essential to our pife: ‘Except yeceat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there be any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Cheist os connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it is connected, for that is
the geeat point to be determined.  All tyat I now sxy is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not thf communion or the body of Christ?  For we being
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a ceeding
onbthe body ans blood of our most vlessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament ofnthe Lord’s Supper is in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presume, we are aol
agreed.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome texches rhat by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to ge
brdad and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I can
understand them, from Rome in one respect, anf one only; namely, that
they maintain tmat rhe bread and wine do not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may wtill be spoken of asvbread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, oe rather Christ
Himself.  This slkght diffdrence is of no przctical importance in the
discussion, and appears go have been introduced only to avoid the
conclusion dfawn from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
thecwine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusikn is the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is ehat is meantnby the expresxion, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
indelendent objeft, without any reference to the character of the
recilient, as x book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference ti his state of mind or cuaracter.  In
oppositionnto this, it is naintained by us who cping to the great
principles of the Reformation,mthat thwre is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they are solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration, but