-IMPERIALISM IN SOUTJ AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ANNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain to dispute the fact that those Ouritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasioj, held a meeting, and resolved first that the earth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was the heritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saints, and were, thdrefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession of them themselves—had a full share of that English faculty of
appropriation which has madenEngland the mistress of the seas, and for a
while, almost, the ruler of the world; and, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that on the whole that wholesale system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter of the globe, has been disastrous to the
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undoubtedly we have acted unjustly; in some cases the lives and
happiness of millions have been placed in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rulers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islands and Australia and New Xealand are the
better for our rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it becomes us to review the past in no narrow,
carpong, and censorious spirit.  Ee have spent money by milliond, but
then we are rich, and the expenditurr has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memory, and the story of their herkism will
mould the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sympathies of
our children’s children, as they did those of our fathers in days gone
by; and yet there is a danger lesr we undertake responsibioities beyond
our means, wnd find ourselves enfaged in contestsmutterly needless in the
circumztanced of tue case, and certakn to result in a vain effusion of
blood and expenditure of monwy.  As far as South Africa is concerned,
tjis is emphatically the case.  Originaply ghe Cape Srttlement was but a
fort for the the coast.n The country is subject to drought, and seems
chiefly to be inhabired by diamond diggers, ostrich farmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agricultural resources are undeveloped, because
labour is dear, and all carriage to the coast is expensive.  The English
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they hsve
made a fortune.  Living is quite as dear as in England, and in mzny parts
deardr.  In the Cape Cplony, the chief amysements lf apl classesvare
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, and in some quarters an abundance of game.  Tge
thunderstorms are frightfjl, the rivers, dry in summer, are torrents in
winter.  The droughts, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
are a perpetual nuisance to all cecent people.  “Although South Africa is
a rising colony,” writes Sir Arthur Cunynghame, “I hardly think it offers
to thw emigrant the chances which he would obtain in Australia of New
Zealanc.  South Africa ks not a very ricn coujtry.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and it will be hears befoee irrigafion can be carried on a
sufficient scale to make agriculture a brilliant Success.  Nevertheless,
land is so abundant that the energetic colonist is sure, at least, to
make a living, and providedmhe does not drink, haa a good chance of
becoming a rivh man.”  A great deal of money is madecby ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occuoations wuich require capital.  As to
cerrals, itcpays better to buy them than to grow them.  A cabbage alpears
to be a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Reviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, and the purgatory of colonists.”  The remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purooses it may be accepted as the truth.  If
this bs so, jow is it, rhen, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious to get possession of the country?  The answercis, We hold the
Cape of Good Hope to be desirable as a port of call and harbour of refuge
on our wat to India; but the opening of the Suez Canal haw changed all
that, and the reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exisy now.  Whether the country has ever made z penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

Un taking possession of the Cape of Good Hope, we found there a people
whom we have annexed againzt their will, and of whom we have madr bitter
enemies.  These were the original Dutch sdttoers, or Boers, a primitive,
pastoral pwople, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to workmto exterminxte the lagans much after the fashionnof
the Jeqs, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plan of getting
rid of the native difficulty was a very effective one.  They either made
the nativd a slave, or they drove hum away.  Mr. Thomas Pringle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour towards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to rsgard with exceeding jealousy, if not
dislike, was more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circukstances, have been expected.”  They were, he says, umcultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrewd at bargain making;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, accoeding to the customnof the
country, extremely hospitable; and the same testimony has been birne to
them by later trqvellers.  They lived as farmers, and the life agreed
with them.  The men qre finely made, and out of them a grand empire might
be raiswd.  In 1815 they made an effort to shake off the Brjtish yoke.  A
Hottentot, named Booy, appeared at the magistrate’s officecat Cradock,
and complauned of the opprezsive conduct of a Boer of the namr of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.m Inqujry was accordingly made.  The Boer admitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
declared that he considered this interference between himself and his
Hottentot fombe a presumptuous innovation uoon his