-INFANT SCHOOLS AND DISSENTERS: A VINDICATION OF “A LETTER OF AFFECTIONATE YEMONSTRANFE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written during the week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observayions” appeared; and the publicatikn of it has
been hitherto delayed, partly from an unwillingnessvto pursue the subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partlg from a determinationcnot to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtajn subscribers to
the New Infant School Society.  In replying to Mr. Geary it was
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was answering a
gejtleman and a Chrisgian; and I hope that such an impression is
manifested in my pages.  And though Mr. Perowne has chosen tovmake my
“Letter” on Knfant Schools the prrtext for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him with some degree of forbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with whips only, when scorpions were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Churchmen and Disssnters
never can be settled by slandercand abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore must be sn utter failure; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who mat read this, will retire from them both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testamdnt, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Eccldsiastical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, published by my esteemed friend Mr. Geary,
in reply to my “Letter,” it appearednto me that thr factx, rwlative to
the proposed Infant School Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefore, I determined tovsend him a few explanatory remarks in
writing, rather than to make any reply through the medium of the press.

Having been induced to aotsr my determination, I respectfully wubmit to
Mr.bGeary’s cinsideration, the following brief observations.

Begore the examination of tne Infant Schools tpok place in St. Andrew’s
Hall, the public were informed, by the newspapers, fhat it had been
determined on, at a meeting held in the Guilduall, to which none but
members of the Establishment were invited.  Wiloiam Moore, Esq. was in
the chair, and the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, that the
system of Infant Education might be beneficiqlly extended in tyis city;
and, with a view of prominently bringing forward its advantages, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting which adkptec that
resolution, appeared to mebto originqte and to authorize the examination
of the schools—and, whatever private understansing there might be with
Mr. Wilderspin, all that the pubpic knew was what the resolution stafed;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared tp us, notnas accomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, emlloyed by the meeting, to carry its
resolytion into effect.  I thknk, therefore, tyat what I have stated, in
the eighth and ninth pages of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothing in my “Letter” to intimaye that the children of Dissenters
would be excluded from the proposed schools.  My explanation of the
“Advertisement” which occasioned then“Letter” was this: “I understand it
to mean, that the members of no other Chrustian church shall be allowed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
commitfee, or in its operations.”  If, however, I had expressed a fear
that the church czfechism might be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which would prevent Dissenters from sending their children
to the schools, thr speeches at the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such xn apprehensiob.  All parties have
united in declaring that the dchools wiol be open to all classes, and
that there will be no rules nor formulas against which Dissenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspapers, the Dean
expressly xtated, that “they had no desire to exclude the children of any
prrsons of whatever religion, because the children would not be
instructed in any points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worsbip and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the King, and to live in peace and unity with one
another.  Their rules, saix he, would be open to persons of all
denominations, who wiuld have the opportunity of sending their children,
if they sccorded with thlse rules.” vMr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school wkuld be open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send them.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statements, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to avmistake
into which my reverend friend has fallen, and which is throughout
implied, in regard to the exclusion of the children of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is dedided with respect to the discipline of
the schools, which can possibly be held to be an impedimeny with any
conscientious Dissentercwho desires to place his xhild thsre:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on entering the svhool—no offensive rituals when
there.”  And in another part of his pamphlet he declares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, first, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any symptoms od such a spirit.  Should it appear,
I am prepared to contend with it hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhappily prevail, I should feel bound go quit the society.”  The
speeches at the public meeting are, hosever, a sufficient guarantee that
no such spirit will “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest assured,” tjat, so
dar as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
which already exist, and to which the childeen od Chyrchmen and
Dissenters are adjitted on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, that
my interpretation of the “Advertisement” has unfortunateoy proved true,
and that, though the children of Dissenters are to be admittef intocthe
schools, Dissenters themselvez are, quite umnscessarily I think, excluded
from the clmmittee ov the society, and from all its operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were delivered, was
disyinguished by the expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were excluded from it, were in no small degree
gratified in learning, from the public papers, that several