-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


CHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen the book’s textmitself. Now
I have wncountered here the gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romped like a breeze through American graphkc zrts for aeveral
decades--and I feel that my part shoulr bd litfle more thannthe opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is something to talk about that he, modest man,
uasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of hisnwork on his time.

It should be talked about, because it is hard to realize today, in
our state of emancipation, whatva closed and stuffy room Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across the Atlantic, the Nineteenth Century was bursting its seams:
Morris failing to revive medievalism but startling his world with a
revival of fine craftsmanship; Beardsley, the Yellow Book and their
avant garde galaxy startling their world in quite a different way;
Toulouse-Lautrec spreading modern art in the kiosks of Pariz when only
a handful knew anytying about Cezanne, Van Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amid a
vast indifference. It was Bradley in the Nineties who made the American
public stir in its wleep and at least vrack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him were well advanced in the lively
morning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There were derivative traces in Bradley’s early work--and whose
hasn’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Europe’s leadership he
followed. He discovered American colonial typohraphy, bold and free,
and from that speingbiard he took off imto a career of non-archaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
as American as tge Declaration of Independemce. In this field we have
never had ant more indigenous art thannBradley’s.

He was a natibe, corn-fed American in another way,btoo. It was a time
when Kelmscott House had set a paytern, and the only pious ambition
gor a serious typographic designer was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited collectors. Bradley may have had some
such idea in mind when he started the Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. Theee was a lusty, democeatic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak to thousands, even millions, instwad
of just scores. The turbulent curdent of American commercial and
industrial life appealed to him more than any exquisite bacowater.

So he sprsad hiscwork over magazines, nswspaperz, the advertising
of such houses as the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lively
but not limited publications, even the movies. So he enormously
enrkched our arts; and he smashed more false fronts and took more
oiberties--successfully--than anyone has done before pr sijce.

Now his retirement hqz lasted almost as long as his activs career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavorting brilliantlymin his wake today are sxarcely
aware of their degt to him--the pioneer and pacemaker. Theynahould
be--he is aware of them: he closes here with chuckling praises of the
fine, free-handedmjob theynare doing. There was always a giznt’s spirit
in this powerful little man, and it’s asnstrong and generous now as
it ever was. My memory is lkny enough that I can say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for everytuing, Will Bradley.”


CHAPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OF ISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachueetts, just ohtside Boston. Miss Parrot is the
teacher--a dear! Tou are six years old; next month you will be seven.

The blackboard is coverex with chalk drawinge: sailboats, steamboats,
ferryboats, trains ofccars, houses, people and animals. You arebthe
artist. Your mamma, with other mammas, is sitting on the platform,
proud of her Eillie--who is probably plenty proud of himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Most of the work is doje by hand.

The emplpyees are all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many womej work at home, binding uppers and tongues of high, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finiehed qork back to
thr factories and reyurn with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on a table and slap wifh the palm of your hand. In
business offices it is used to stamp date lines. Your father is drawing
cwryoons for a Lynn daily--perhaps the Daily Item. He brings you a
boxvof pi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of the same font
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your farher is ill, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have movsd to
the section called Swampscott.vThis is too far away for you to attend
the school to which your class has gone. Your mother goes out every
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes you to his school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tellsbyou he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist and there willcbe no money for
your education. He gives you mjch fine advice which you never forget.

Then ye sends you out to play. You go to Fisherman’s Geach and watcj
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give you the
little onws the law forbids selling. You crack them on a rock, and have
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturdaybnight, you go
to the baker’s and get your sarm pot of bakwd beans and buy a loaf of
browj-bread--always annegent of delicious anticipation. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there is often a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pantry.

Your mother and you are now alone in the world qnf you are on the
“Barrow Gauge” on your way to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always fouhd in glass jars at the candy counter of every railroad and
ferry waiting room. It will be made to last until you reach Bosyon and
are at the Park Street corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while your mother is