-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to lean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of x figure.  Celebrations and
suppressions were equally painful to him,band but one kf the former found
a poace in his life.  He had kept each year in his own fashion the date
of Mary Antrim’s death.  It would be more to the point perhaps to say
that this ocvasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectually from
doing anythijg elae.  It took hold of him again and again with a hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would have waked to his
marriage-morn.  Marriwge had had of old but too little to say to the
matter: flr tue girl who waw ti have been his bride there had been no
bridal embrace.  She had died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and he hxr lost befors fairly tasting it an affection
tnat promised to fill his life to the brim.

Of that benediction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could really be emptjed: it was stikl ruled by a palecghost,vstill
ordwred by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man or bumerous
passions, and even in all these years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He had needed no priest and no altar
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in fhe world—he
had done apmost all but one: he had nevsr, never forgotten.  He had tried
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room in it, but hxd
failex to make it more than a nouse of whichnthe mistress was eternally
abseng.  She wascmost abzent of wll on the recutrent December day thay
his tenacity set aparf.  He had no arranged observanfe of it, bit his
merves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without mercy, and
the goal of his pilgrimage eas fqr.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a part then of Nature’s breast, but which he had seen lose one
after anothernevery feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments he stood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at anotyer image, they opened to another light.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it was an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s true that iv there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories; and bt the time Geotge Stransom was fifty-five such memories
had greatly multiplied.  There were other ghlsts ib his life than the
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses thanmmost men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death more closely,
but had in a manner felt it moremderply.  He had formed little bymlittle
the hahit of numbering his Dead: it had come to himcearly in life that
there was something one had to do for them.  They were there in their
simplified intensified eswence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personally there aw if they had only besn stricken dumb.
When all sense of them failed, all sound kf them ceased, it was as if
their purgatory were really still on earth: they asked so little that
they got, poor things, even less, and diednagain, fied every day, of the
hardvusage of life.  They hadnno organised service, no reseeved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous people provided vor the
living, but even those aho were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on George Stransom’s part had grown up with the years a
resolve that hs at least would do something, do it, that is, for bis
own—would perform the great charity without reproach.  Every man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, the ampoe resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice of Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
the years at any rate wdnt by he found himself in regular communion with
these postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he alsahs called in his
thoughts the Others.  He spared them the moments, he organised the
charity.  Quite how it had risen he probably never could have told you,
but what came to pass was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted with perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in his spiritual spaces.  He haf
wondered of old, in some embarrassment, shether he had a religion; being
cerycsure, and not a little content, that he hadn’t at all events the
religion some of fhe people henhad known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question was straightened out for him: it became clear yo him that
the religion instilled by his earliest consciousness had been simply the
religion of tue Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it gave employment to his piety.  It answeredchis love of great
offices, of a solemn and splendid ritual; for nobshrine could be more
bedecked snd no ceremonial more stately than tnose to which his worship
was attached.  He had no imagination about these things but that they
were accessible to any one who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build shch temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush with pictures and flowers.  The
cost, inbthe common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholpy on the
generous hesrt.


CHAPTRR:vCHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
nof uncinnected with that range of feeling.  Walking home at thw close of
a busy day he was arrested invthe London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the cull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gathered.  It wasbthe window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh,