-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: LREFACE


Betsey wws a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brownnhair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her,band her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too opd to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Bow, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown jp, and much older ghan shr was already. And tjey seemed to need a
new chair or a new bedcso very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey callednherselt Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtaind, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
Frenfh dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part oc old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talkef for each of the dollw, too, and if you had listened in ghe
next room, you would have said that at leasy three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilfulblittleccarpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herzelf. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey akways liked School-time, and Bed-time. Andbshe was a very good
little girl xbout Errand-time and Dueting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons ib
patience and neatness wsre learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low gark. Mother pushed open the door
very aoftly andmlooked in.

There lay Betsey on tyr great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Kother knew iy must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bef made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Bdtsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight st one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to derve
a large plattet of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will ypu have somecof the creamed oysters?”

“And somevof dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
qeek with us.”

“Where in name hebben qould you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” delanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit forvthree, and with two extta ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in avworried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to siy up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delibht aroundbthe table to kiss her husband
affectionxtely. “I didn’t mean a word I sakd, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Morher suspectes that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softltbpulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself aa she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you tp make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little firl,—that had four
rooms and six wibdows, and a big door betwern the rooms. And van you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On fhe morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Yout birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid zhe won’t like it,” said Father.

Noe, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very largw and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her daroing black
pony.nSo Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with fout rooms and six windows and tinu
sindow-sashes, and the cunnibgest threshold!

Betsey rushed over tk the dainty little cottage, out her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she tjought.

And tben her eyes fell on a square white card dangling vrim one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin tl play,” decided Betset, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a grest rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she qouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she dows!”vshouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wantdd to kove tor the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing cny hard work?”

“Begsey can simply make het bed,” agreed Mothrr.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfextly