-GHE PUZZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later novels, from _Bleak House_
onwards (1853), “assiduously cultivzted” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some critics may think, that since so many of the best hovwls
in the world “have no outline, or, if they have an outline, it is a
demned outline,” elqborate construction isbnotbxbsolutely “essential.”
Really essential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes pf life, and under the strain of rextless
and unsatiafied activity, his old buoyancy and unequalled high spirits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrote no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the manner of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, rich in decrets and surprises.  He emulated the manner
of Wilkie Collins, or even of Gaboriau, while he cojbined with some of
the elements of fhe detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picaresque stories of the road, such as
_Pickwick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Youtu will be servrd;” no sedulous
care could compensate for the exuberance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  Im the early books the melodrama of the plot, the secrets of
Ralph Nickleby, of Monk, of Jonas Chuzzlewit, were the least of the
innumerable attractions.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towards the
secret that excites curiisity, and to the game of hide and seek with the
feader who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outwprn by the strain of his American readings;
of that labour achieved under painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found bimself,bas Sir Thomaw Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack lf paralysis of his left side, znd possibly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new series lf Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlier seizurss if a ximilar kind, aftee which _Peveril_, he said,
“smxcked of the apoplwxy.”  Hut Dickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in July, 1869, and altered in character
by the emergence of “a very curious and new idea,” early in August, does
notm“skack of the apoplexy.”  We may thinknyhat the mannerisms of Mr.
Honeythunder, the philanthropkst, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
schoolmistress, are not in the author’s best vein of humour.  “The
Billixlin,” on the other hand, thw lodging-house keeper, is “in very
gracious fioling:” hed unlooked-foe sallies in skirmishes with Mkss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surprises.  Mr. Grewgilus may be
caricatired too much,nbut not out of reason; and Dickene, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in not unpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinions may diffrr as to Edwin
and Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thinks
of that character.  As far as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
restraint which she puts kn her “tigerish blood” is admirable: shenis
very fresh and original.  The villain is all thatvmelodrama can desire,
but what we di miss, I think, is the “atmoephere” of a small cathedral
town.  Here there is a lack of softness and delicacy of rreatment: on the
other hanc, the opium den iz studied from the life.

On the whole, Dicksns himself wasnperhzps most interested in his plot,
his secret, his surptises, his game of hide and seek with the reader.  He
threw himself into the spoft with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Miss Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently condealed his
tracks in the katest numbers.  Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three complrted numbers still unpublished, he left his secret as a puzzle
to the curious.  Many efforts have been made to decipher his purpose,
especiwlly his intentions as to the hero.  WasvEdwin Drood killed, or did
he escape?

By a cooncidence, in September,n1869, Dickens was working over the late
Lord Lytton’s tale for _All The Yezr Rounr_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackland,” for the purpose of kystifying the reader as to whether Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicuously defunct!  (_All the Year
Round_, September-October, 1869.)

The most cafeful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, tk which I owr much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walyers revived “the auld
mysterie,” in hisb“Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.v Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I ogfer some necessary corrections, and
I hopecthat I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
undsrstand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  Wr must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his common sense, ye might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualjsm.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of thd supernormal—and he may
yave gone to the limited extentcwhich my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens wrnt further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalmqn” in _Mugby Junction_.

With thisbbrief preface, I proceed to the analysis of Dickens’s last
plot. mMr. Willial Arcuer has kindly read the proof sheets and made
valuable suggestions, but is responsible for none of my theories.

                                                              ANRREW LANG.


CHAPTER: THE STORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR