-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Managercof
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have wityin the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My ecpefiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I have come jpme from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes pf the Drama upon ahich thd cuetain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiignomy, tqken in connscyion with manner.
The zrt of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must requireb(for evdrything
does) spme patience and some pains.  Thay these are not uduallu given ro
it,—that numbers of people accept abfew stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor knoe
yhe refinemenrs that are truest,—that You, for insrancw, give a great
deal of time ahd attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Itakian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to readmthe
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assume to benfive hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a pittle self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over xnd over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, andbI have been taken in (of
course) bybfriends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How camemI to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain tuemselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which seoarated my own office from oye general outer office
in the City was of thick platr-glass.  I could see through iy what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in plzce of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the hojse was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that U
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, fromntheir faces alkne, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mejtion that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
prwctised upoj by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going tp yell.

He had come in without my observing it, and uad put his hat and umbrella
on the briad counter, and was bending ovet it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, dxceedinglh well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air,nhad a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straigut up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he hadbsaid, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please,bmy fruend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no tdespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man tje moment Icthus saw him.

He had asked for some kf our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explainibg them.  An obliged and agteeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
knlwn a vast quantoty of nonsende talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day ij the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corbsr of his eyelash,bthat he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, ig
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card jn his hand.  ‘Mr. Julihs Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mf. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have tyoutht him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ aaid I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recojmended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the ppeasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sjr!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-sloken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so,vsir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fkrtnight of that day Imwent to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and bokks, and the firxt lan
I saw