-THE MARRIAGES-


CHAPTER: I


“WON’T you stay a little longer?” the hostess asked while she held the
girl’s hand and smiled.  “It’s too early for every one to go—it’s too
absurd.”  Mrs. Churchley inclined her head to one side and looked
gracious; she flourished about her face, in a vaguely protecting
sheltering way, an enormous fan of red feathers.  Everything in her
composition, for Adela Chart, was enormous.  She had big eyes, big teeth,
big shoulders, big hands, big rings and bracelets, big jewels of every
sort and many of them.  The train of her crimson dress was longer than
any other; her house was huge; her drawing-room, especially now that the
company had left it, looked vast, and it offered to the girl’s eyes a
collection of the largest sofas and chairs, pictures, mirrors, clocks,
that she had ever beheld.  Was Mrs. Churchley’s fortune also large, to
account for so many immensities?  Of this Adela could know nothing, but
it struck her, while she smiled sweetly back at their entertainer, that
she had better try to find out.  Mrs. Churchley had at least a high-hung
carriage drawn by the tallest horses, and in the Row she was to be seen
perched on a mighty hunter.  She was high and extensive herself, though
not exactly fat; her bones were big, her limbs were long, and her loud
hurrying voice resembled the bell of a steamboat.  While she spoke to his
daughter she had the air of hiding from Colonel Chart, a little shyly,
behind the wide ostrich fan.  But Colonel Chart was not a man to be
either ignored or eluded.

Ludovico Caracci and Guido had given him hints that were of infinite
value in the moulding of his technique; for colour he had gone to
Titian, Tintoretto, and Rubens, of whom the last named was beginning to
lose his appeal in the last years of Reynolds' life. Sir Joshua had a
supreme facility for taking from every artist the best that was in him,
melting it in the crucible of his own thought, and applying the product
to his pictures. There is no doubt that the sixteenth-century Venetians
impressed Reynolds as much as they impressed Ruskin at a later date, but
in the middle of the eighteenth century the school of Bologna was in
the ascendant in England, and it is through Reynolds' actions rather
than his words that we see how Venice had influenced him. Sir Walter
Armstrong thinks that Reynolds lived well rather than wisely in Italy,
and that when he came back to town his wild oats were all sown, but it
is hard to find any justification for the belief that Reynolds was at
any time of his life a free liver. The pleasures of the table may have
claimed him when he reached middle age; indeed, Dr. Johnson said to him
on one occasion, "You complain about the tea I drink, but I do not count
the glasses you empty," or words to that effect. As far as other forms
of dissipation go, there is no evidence that Reynolds was ever a victim
to them. He was always perfect master of his self-control, and when the
years had toned down certain faults of thought and manner, he became
mellowed, like old wine, and not less stimulating.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Michael Angelo "contorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to say so. However, whether
he were kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academy--with a large number of religious pictures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike for their beauty, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.


May 29, 1992, marks the centenary of the passing of Bahá’u’lláh. His
vision of humanity as one people and of the earth as a common homeland,
dismissed out of hand by the world leaders to whom it was first enunciated
over a hundred years ago, has today become the focus of human hope.

But the pendulum sometimes swings very slowly, and oscillates within
narrow limits; while at other times the changes are violent and rapid. The
last century and a half, beginning with what Arnold Toynbee was the first
to call the Industrial Revolution, has been a period of more rapid change
than any other which history records. The French Revolution, which
coincided with its first stages, helped to break the continuity between
the old order and the new, and both by its direct influence and by the
vigorous reactions which it generated cleft society into conflicting
elements. Then followed a Great War, which shook the social structure to
its base, and awakened into intense vitality the slumbering enthusiasm of
nationality. At the same time, a variety of mechanical inventions gave man
an entirely new control over the forces of nature and a new knowledge of
the laws of nature, and this new knowledge, not content with practical
applications, soon revolutionised all the natural sciences, and profoundly
affected both religion and philosophy. The reign of Queen Victoria, which
I have chosen to mark the limits of my survey to-day, covered the latter
half of this saeculum mirabile, the most wonderful century in human
history.

Mrs. Churchley turned away from her at this and just waited before
answering.  The red fan was up again, and this time it sheltered her from
Adela.  “I’ll give everything up—for _you_,” were the words that issued
from behind it.  “_Do_ stay a little.  I always think this is such a nice
hour.  One can really talk,” Mrs. Churchley went on.  The Colonel
laughed; he said it wasn’t fair.  But their hostess pressed his daughter.
“Do sit down; it’s the only time to have any talk.”  The girl saw her
father sit down, but she wandered away, turning her back and pretending
to look at a picture.  She was so far from agreeing with Mrs. Churchley
that it was an hour she particularly disliked.  She was conscious of the
queerness, the shyness, in London, of the gregarious flight of guests
after a dinner, the general _sauve qui peut_ and panic fear of being left
with the host and hostess.  But personally she always felt the contagion,
always conformed to the rush.  Besides, she knew herself turn red now,
flushed with a conviction that had come over her and that she wished not
to show.

Her father sat down on one of the big sofas with Mrs. Churchley;
fortunately he was also a person with a presence that could hold its own.
Adela didn’t care to sit and watch them while they made love, as she
crudely imaged it, and she cared still less to join in their strange
commerce.  She wandered further away, went into another of the bright
“handsome,” rather nude rooms—they were like women dressed for a
ball—where the displaced chairs, at awkward angles to each other, seemed
to retain the attitudes of bored talkers.  Her heart beat as she had
seldom known it, but she continued to make a pretence of looking at the
pictures on the walls and the ornaments on the tables, while she hoped
that, as she preferred it, it would be also the course her father would
like best.  She hoped “awfully,” as she would have said, that he wouldn’t
think her rude.  She was a person of courage, and he was a kind, an
intensely good-natured man; nevertheless she went in some fear of him.
At home it had always been a religion with them to be nice to the people
he liked.  How, in the old days, her mother, her incomparable mother, so
clever, so unerring, so perfect, how in the precious days her mother had
practised that art!  Oh her mother, her irrecoverable mother!  One of the
pictures she was looking at swam before her eyes.  Mrs. Churchley, in the
natural course, would have begun immediately to climb staircases.  Adela
could see the high bony shoulders and the long crimson tail and the
universal coruscating nod wriggle their horribly practical way through
the rest of the night.  Therefore she _must_ have had her reasons for
detaining them.  There were mothers who thought every one wanted to marry
their eldest son, and the girl sought to be clear as to whether she
herself belonged to the class of daughters who thought every one wanted
to marry their father.  Her companions left her alone; and though she
didn’t want to be near them it angered her that Mrs. Churchley didn’t
call her.  That proved she was conscious of the situation.  She would
have called her, only Colonel Chart had perhaps dreadfully murmured
“Don’t, love, don’t.”  This proved he also was conscious.  The time was
really not long—ten minutes at the most elapsed—when he cried out gaily,
pleasantly, as if with a small jocular reproach, “I say, Adela, we must
release this dear lady!”  He spoke of course as if it had been Adela’s
fault that they lingered.  When they took leave she gave Mrs. Churchley,
without intention and without defiance, but from the simple sincerity of
her pain, a longer look into the eyes than she had ever given her before.
Mrs. Churchley’s onyx pupils reflected the question as distant dark
windows reflect the sunset; they seemed to say: “Yes, I _am_, if that’s
what you want to know!”

What made the case worse, what made the girl more sure, was the silence
preserved by her companion in the brougham on their way home.  They
rolled along in the June darkness from Prince’s Gate to Seymour Street,
each looking out of a window in conscious prudence; watching but not
seeing the hurry of the London night, the flash of lamps, the quick roll
on the wood of hansoms and other broughams.  Adela had expected her
father would say something about Mrs. Churchley; but when he said nothing
it affected her, very oddly, still more as if he had spoken.  In Seymour
Street he asked the footman if Mr. Godfrey had come in, to which the
servant replied that he had come in early and gone straight to his room.
Adela had gathered as much, without saying so, from a lighted window on
the second floor; but she contributed no remark to the question.  At the
foot of the stairs her father halted as if he had something on his mind;
but what it amounted to seemed only the dry “Good-night” with which he
presently ascended.  It was the first time since her mother’s death that
he had bidden her good-night without kissing her.  They were a kissing
family, and after that dire event the habit had taken a fresh spring.
She had left behind her such a general passion of regret that in kissing
each other they felt themselves a little to be kissing her.  Now, as,
standing in the hall, with the stiff watching footman—she could have said
to him angrily “Go away!”—planted near her, she looked with unspeakable
pain at her father’s back while he mounted, the effect was of his having
withheld from another and a still more slighted cheek the touch of his
lips.

He was going to his room, and after a moment she heard his door close.
Then she said to the servant “Shut up the house”—she tried to do
everything her mother had done, to be a little of what she had been,
conscious only of falling woefully short—and took her own way upstairs.
After she had reached her room she waited, listening, shaken by the
apprehension that she should hear her father come out again and go up to
Godfrey.  He would go up to tell him, to have it over without delay,
precisely because it would be so difficult.  She asked herself indeed why
he should tell Godfrey when he hadn’t taken the occasion—their drive home
being an occasion—to tell herself.  However, she wanted no announcing, no
telling; there was such a horrible clearness in her mind that what she
now waited for was only to be sure her father wouldn’t proceed as she had
imagined.  At the end of the minutes she saw this particular danger was
over, upon which she came out and made her own way to her brother.
Exactly what she wanted to say to him first, if their parent counted on
the boy’s greater indulgence, and before he could say anything, was:
“Don’t forgive him; don’t, don’t!”

He was to go up for an examination, poor lad, and during these weeks his
lamp burned till the small hours.  It was for the Foreign Office, and
there was to be some frightful number of competitors; but Adela had great
hopes of him—she believed so in his talents and saw with pity how hard he
worked.  This would have made her spare him, not trouble his night, his
scanty rest, if anything less dreadful had been at stake.  It was a
blessing however that one could count on his coolness, young as he
was—his bright good-looking discretion, the thing that already made him
half a man of the world.  Moreover he was the one who would care most.
If Basil was the eldest son—he had as a matter of course gone into the
army and was in India, on the staff, by good luck, of a
governor-general—it was exactly this that would make him comparatively
indifferent.  His life was elsewhere, and his father and he had been in a
measure military comrades, so that he would be deterred by a certain
delicacy from protesting; he wouldn’t have liked any such protest in an
affair of _his_.  Beatrice and Muriel would care, but they were too young
to speak, and this was just why her own responsibility was so great.

Godfrey was in working-gear—shirt and trousers and slippers and a
beautiful silk jacket.  His room felt hot, though a window was open to
the summer night; the lamp on the table shed its studious light over a
formidable heap of text-books and papers, the bed moreover showing how he
had flung himself down to think out a problem.  As soon as she got in she
began.  “Father’s going to marry Mrs. Churchley, you know.”

She saw his poor pink face turn pale.  “How do you know?”

“I’ve seen with my eyes.  We’ve been dining there—we’ve just come home.
He’s in love with her.  She’s in love with _him_.  They’ll arrange it.”

“Oh I say!” Godfrey exclaimed, incredulous.
