-BLUE-BIRD WEATHER-


CHAPTER: I


It was now almost too dark to distinguish objects; duskier and vaguer
became the flat world of marshes, set here and there with cypress and
bounded only by far horizons; and at last land and water disappeared
behind the gathered curtains of the night. There was no sound from the
waste except the wind among the withered reeds and the furrowing splash
of wheel and hoof over the submerged causeway.

The boy who was driving had scarcely spoken since he strapped Marche's
gun cases and valise to the rear of the rickety wagon at the railroad
station. Marche, too, remained silent, preoccupied with his own
reflections. Wrapped in his fur-lined coat, arms folded, he sat doubled
forward, feeling the Southern swamp-chill busy with his bones. Now and
then he was obliged to relight his pipe, but the cold bit at his
fingers, and he hurried to protect himself again with heavy gloves.

The small, rough hands of the boy who was driving were naked, and
finally Marche mentioned it, asking the child if he were not cold.

"No, sir," he said, with a colorless brevity that might have been
shyness or merely the dull indifference of the very poor, accustomed to
discomfort.

"Don't you feel cold at all?" persisted Marche kindly.

"No, sir."

The cheery youth went at his work with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

"Yes, sir."

By the light of a flaming match, Marche glanced sideways at him as he
drew his pipe into a glow once more, and for an instant the boy's gray
eyes flickered toward his in the flaring light. Then darkness masked
them both again.

Students of the famous discourses that Sir Joshua addressed annually to
the Royal Academy after he became first President of the new
institution, may be justified if they suspect that the great painter
adopted the same rule in dealing with his students that skilled musical
composers use when dealing with their pupils. A musican knows that the
laws of harmony and counterpoint are not fixed, that the musical horizon
widens year by year, and that rules may often be disregarded by a
composer who has something to say; but, in order that composition may
grow from some definite form, it is necessary that the rules should be
mastered before they are disregarded. So in dealing with things of art,
Reynolds said much to his audience that his own practice did not bear
out. He would not hint at his own preferences quite so frankly as his
canvases did and it is not at all unlikely that he realised as well as
we do, that while students, like the poor, are always with us, great
artists are few and far between, and will survive all academic
limitations.

"Yes, sir," almost sullenly.

"How old are you?"

"Eleven."

"You're a big boy, all right. I have never seen your father. He is at
the clubhouse, no doubt."

"Yes, sir," scarcely audible.

"And you and he live there all alone, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir." A moment later the boy added jerkily, "And my sister," as
though truth had given him a sudden nudge.

"Oh, you have a sister, too?"

"Yes, sir."

"That makes it very jolly for you, I fancy," said Marche pleasantly.

There was no reply to the indirect question.

His pipe had gone out again, and he knocked the ashes from it and
pocketed it. For a while they drove on in silence, then Marche peered
impatiently through the darkness, right and left, in an effort to see;
and gave it up.

"You must know this road pretty well to be able to keep it," he said.

"As for me, I can't see anything except a dirty little gray star up
aloft."

"The horse knows the road."

"I'm glad of that. Have you any idea how near we are to the house?"

"Half a mile. That's Rattler Creek, yonder."

"How the dickens can you tell?" asked Marche curiously. "You can't see
anything in the dark, can you?"

"I don't know how I can tell," said the boy indifferently.

Marche smiled. "A sixth sense, probably. What did you say your name is?"

"Jim."

"And you're eleven? You'll be old enough to have a gun very soon, Jim.

How would you like to shoot a real, live wild duck?"

"I have shot plenty."

Marche laughed. "Good for you, Jimmy. What did the gun do to you? Kick
you flat on your back?"

The boy said gravely: "Father's gun is too big for me. I have to rest it
on the edge of the blind when I fire."

"Do you shoot from the blinds?"

"Yes, sir."

Marche relapsed into smiling silence. In a few moments he was thinking
of other things--of this muddy island which had once been the property
of a club consisting of five carefully selected and wealthy members, and
which, through death and resignation, had now reverted to him. Why he
had ever bought in the shares, as one by one the other members either
died or dropped out, he did not exactly know. He didn't care very much
for duck shooting. In five years he had not visited the club; and why he
had come here this year for a week's sport he scarcely knew, except that
he had either to go somewhere for a rest or ultimately be carried,
kicking, into what his slangy doctor called the "funny house."

So here he was, on a cold February night, and already nearly at his
destination; for now he could make out a light across the marsh, and
from dark and infinite distances the east wind bore the solemn rumor of
the sea, muttering of wrecks and death along the Atlantic sands beyond
the inland sounds.

"Well, Jim," he said, "I never thought I'd survive this drive, but here
we are, and still alive. Are you frozen solid, you poor boy?"

The boy smiled, shyly, in negation, as they drove into the bar of light
from the kitchen window and stopped. Marche got down very stiffly. The
kitchen door opened at the same moment, and a woman's figure appeared in
the lamplight--a young girl, slender, bare armed, drying her fingers as
she came down the steps to offer a small, weather-roughened hand to
Marche.

"My brother will show you to your room," she said. "Supper will be ready
in a few minutes."

So he thanked her and went away with Jim, relieving the boy of the
valise and one gun-case, and presently came to the quarters prepared for
him. The room was rough, with its unceiled walls of yellow pine, a
chair, washstand, bed, and a nail or two for his wardrobe. It had been
the affectation of the wealthy men composing the Foam Island Duck Club
to exist almost primitively when on the business of duck shooting, in
contradistinction to the overfed luxury of other millionaires
inhabiting other more luxuriously appointed shooting-boxes along the
Chesapeake.

The Foam Island Club went in heavily for simplicity, as far as the
two-story shanty of a clubhouse was concerned; but their island was one
of the most desirable in the entire region, and their live decoys the
most perfectly trained and cared for.

Marche, washing his tingling fingers and visage in icy water, rather
wished, for a moment, that the club had installed modern plumbing; but
delectable odors from the kitchen put him into better humor, and
presently he went off down the creaking and unpainted stairs to warm
himself at a big stove until summoned to the table.

He was summoned in a few moments by the same girl who had greeted him;
and she also waited on him at table, placing before him in turn his
steaming soup, a platter of fried bass and smoking sweet potatoes, then
the inevitable broiled canvas-back duck with rice, and finally home-made
preserves--wild grapes, exquisitely fragrant in their thin, golden
syrup.

Marche was that kind of a friendly young man who is naturally
gay-hearted and also a little curious--sometimes to the verge of
indiscretion. For his curiosity and inquiring interest in his fellow-men
was easily aroused--particularly when they were less fortunately
situated than he in a world where it is a favorite fiction that all are
created equal. He was, in fact, that particular species of human
nuisance known as a humanitarian; but he never dreamed he was a
nuisance, and certainly never meant to be.


Bahá’u’lláh’s mission began in a subterranean dungeon in Teheran in August
1852. Born into a noble family that could trace its ancestry back to the
great dynasties of Persia’s imperial past, He declined the ministerial
career open to Him in government, and chose instead to devote His energies
to a range of philanthropies which had, by the early 1840s, earned Him
widespread renown as “Father of the Poor.” This privileged existence
swiftly eroded after 1844, when Bahá’u’lláh became one of the leading
advocates of a movement that was to change the course of His country’s
history.

"Has the shooting been pretty good?" he asked pleasantly, plying knife
and fork in the service of a raging appetite.

"It has been."

"What do you think of the prospects for to-morrow?"

She said gravely: "I am afraid it will be blue-bird weather."

It was a new, but graphic, expression to him; and he often remembered
it afterward, and how quaintly it fell from her lips as she stood there
in the light of the kerosene lamp, slim, self-possessed, in her faded
gingham gown and apron, the shapely middle finger of one little
weather-tanned hand resting on the edge of the cloth.

"You are Miss Herold, I suppose?" he said, looking up at her with his
pleasant smile.

"Yes."

"You are not Southern?"

"No," she said briefly. And he then remembered that the Hon. Cicero W.

Gilkins, when he was president of the now defunct club, had installed a
Northern man as resident chief game-protector and superintendent at the
Foam Island Club House.

Marche had never even seen Herold; but, through lack of personal
interest, and also because he needed somebody to look out for the
property, he had continued to pay this man Herold his inconsiderable
salary every year, scarcely knowing, himself, why he did not put the
Foam Island shooting on the market and close up the matter for good.

"It's been five years since I was here, Miss Herold," he said, smiling.

"That was in the old days of the club, when Judge Gilkins and Colonel
Vyse used to come here shooting every season. But you don't remember
them, I fancy."

"I remember them."

"Really! You must have been quite a child."

"I was thirteen."

"Oh, then you are eighteen, now," he said humorously.

Her grave, young lips were only slightly responsive to his smile.

"You have been here a long time," he said. "Do you find it lonely?"

"Sometimes," she admitted.

"What do you do for recreation?"

"I don't think I know what you mean, Mr. Marche."

"I mean for pleasure."

She looked at him out of her clear, gray eyes, then turned her gaze on
the window. But she could not see through it; the pane only reflected
her face darkly; and to her, for a moment, it seemed that way with her
whole pent-up life, here in the Virginia marshes--no outlet, no outlook,
and wherever she turned her wistful eyes only her own imprisoned self to
confront her out of the dull obscurity.

"I suppose," he said, watching her, "that you sometimes go to Norfolk
for a holiday?"

"No."

"Or to Old Point, or Baltimore, perhaps?"

She had her under lip between her teeth, now, and was looking so fixedly
at the window that he thought she had not heard him.

He rose from the table, and as she turned to meet his pleasant eyes he
smilingly thanked her for waiting on him.

"And now," he said, "if you will say to your father that I'd like to
have a little talk with him----"

"Father is ill in bed," she said, in a low voice.

"Oh, I'm sorry. I hope it isn't anything serious."

"I--think not."

"Will he be able to see me to-morrow?"

"I am afraid not, Mr. Marche. He--he asked me to say to you that you
might safely transact any business with me. I know all about it," she
said, speaking a little hurriedly. "I keep the accounts, and I have
every item and every bill ready for your inspection; and I can tell you
exactly what condition the property is in and what lumber has been cut
and what repairs have been necessary. Whenever you are ready for me, I
will come into the sitting room," she added, "because Jim and I have had
our supper."

The astonishing progress in all measurable values which marked the first
half of the reign produced a whole literature of complacency. I quoted
some examples of the language which was then common, in my Romanes Lecture
on 'The Idea of Progress.' Macaulay supplies some of the best examples. We
must remember that the progress was real, and that its speed was
unexampled in history. The country was, in vulgar language, a going
concern, as it never was before and has not been since. The dominions
beyond the seas were being peopled up and consolidated. At home education
was spreading, liberty was increasing, and the light taxes were raised
with an ease.

So she went away to rinse her hands and lay aside her apron, and in a
few minutes she entered the sitting room. He rose and placed a chair for
her, and she thanked him, flushing a little, and then he resumed his
seat, watching her sorting over the papers in her lap.

Presently she crossed one knee over the other, and one slim, prettily
shaped foot, in its shabby shoe, swung clear of its shadow on the floor.

Then she handed him a sheaf of bills for his inspection, and, pencil in
hand, followed the totals as he read them off aloud.

For half an hour they compared and checked off items, and he found her
accounts accurate to a penny.

"Father bought three geese and a gander from Ike Helm," she said. "They
were rather expensive, but two were mated, and they call very well when
tied out separated. Do you think it was too expensive?" she added
timidly, showing him the bill.

"No," he said, smiling. "I think it's all right. Mated decoys are what
we need, and you can wing-tip a dozen before you get one that will talk
at the right time."

"That is true," she said eagerly. "We try our best to keep up the decoys
and have nothing but talkers. Our geese are nearly all right, and our
ducks are good, but our swans are so vexing! They seem to be such
fools, and they usually behave like silly cygnets. You will see
to-morrow."

While she was speaking, her brother came quietly into the room with an
open book in his hands, and Marche, glancing at it curiously, saw that
it was a Latin grammar.

"Where do you go to school, Jim?" he asked.

"Father teaches me."

Marche, rather astonished at the calibre of his superintendent,
glanced from the boy to his sister in silence. The girl's head
remained steadily lowered over the papers on her knee.