-FOUR DAYS: The Story of a War Marriage-


CHAPTER: I


With savage pity Marjorie regarded a sobbing girl whose face was
distorted, and whose palsied hands were trying to straighten her veil
and push back stray wisps of hair. Marjorie thought: "What a fool she is
to cry like that! Her nose is red; she's a sight. I can control myself.

I can control myself."

An elderly man with an austere face, standing beside Marjorie, started
to light a cigarette. His hands trembled violently and the match
flickered and went out.

Marjorie's heart was beating so fast that it made her feel sick.

A locomotive shrieked, adding its voice to the roar of traffic at
Victoria Station. There came the pounding hiss of escaping steam. The
crowd pressed close to the rails and peered down the foggy platform. A
train had stopped, and the engine was panting close to the gate-rail. A
few men in khaki were alighting from compartments. In a moment there was
a stamping of many feet, and above the roar and confusion in the station
rose the eager voices of multitudes of boys talking, shouting, calling
to each other.

Marjorie saw Leonard before he saw her. He was walking with three
men--joking, laughing absent-mindedly, while his eyes searched for a
face in the crowd. She waited a moment, hidden, suffocated with
anticipation, her heart turning over and over, until he said a
nonchalant good-bye to his companions, who were pounced upon by eager
relatives. Then she crept up behind and put both her hands about his
wrist.

"Hello, Len."

Joy leaped to his eyes.

"Marjie!"

Impossible to say another word. For seconds they became one of the
speechless couples, standing dumbly in the great dingy station,
unnoticed and unnoticing.

"Where's the carriage?" said Leonard, looking blindly about him.

"Outside, of course, Len."

A crooked man in black livery, with a cockade in his hat, who had been
standing reverently in the background, waddled forward, touching his
hat.

"Well, Burns, how are you? Glad to see you."

"Very well, sir, and thank you, sir. 'Appy, most 'appy to see you back,
sir. Pardon, sir, this way." His old face twitched and his eyes devoured
the young lieutenant.

A footman was standing at the horses' heads, but the big bays, champing
their bits, and scattering foam, crouched away from the tall young
soldier when he put out a careless, intimate hand and patted their
snorting noses. He swaggered a little, for all of a sudden he longed to
put his head on their arching necks and cry.

"You've got the old pair out; I thought they had gone to grass," he said
in his most matter-of-fact tone to the pink-faced footman, who was
hardly more than a child.

"Well, sir, the others were taken by the Government. Madam gave them all
away except Starlight and Ginger Girl. There is only me and Burns and
another boy under military age in the stables now, sir."

Inside the carriage Leonard and Marjorie were suddenly overawed by a
strange, delicious shyness. They looked at each other gravely, like two
children at a party, dumb, exquisitely thrilled. It was ten months ago
that they had said a half-tearful, half-laughing good-bye to each other
on the windy, sunny pier at Hoboken. They had been in love two months,
and engaged two weeks. Leonard was sailing for England to keep a rowing
engagement, but he was to return to America in a month. They were to
have an early autumn wedding. Marjorie chose her wedding-dress and was
busy with her trousseau. She had invited her brides-maids. It was to be
a brilliant, conventional affair--flowers, music, countless young people
dancing under festoons and colored lights. In August the war broke out.

Leonard had been in training and at the front from the first. Marjorie
crossed the precarious ocean, to be in England for his first leave. It
was now May: they were to be married at last.

"Marjie."

"Len."

"I have just four days, you know, darling. That's all I could get. We've
been transferred to the Dardanelles; else I wouldn't have got off at
all."

"Four days," murmured Marjorie. She looked up, and met his eyes, and
stared, and could not look away. "It's a long, long time, four days,"

she said, without knowing what she was saying. All at once she put her
hands over her eyes, and, pressing her head fiercely against Leonard's
arm, she began to cry and to laugh, continuing to repeat, senselessly,
"It's a long, long time."

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted his fortune made.

They drew near to Richmond, the familiar avenues and the cool, trim
lawn, and the great trees. Marjorie's tongue all at once loosened; she
chattered whimsically, like an excited child.

"It's home, home, home, and they're all waiting for us--mater and your
father and all the family. He's been in a perfect state all day, poor
old dear, though he hasn't an idea any one's noticed it. Little
Herbert's the only one that's behaved a bit natural--and old Nannie.

I've been rushing about your room, sitting in all the chairs, and
saying, 'To-night he'll be sitting in this chair; to-night he may be
standing in this very spot before the fire; to-night he may be looking
out of this window.' O, Len, we're to be married at half-past eight, and
we're going in motors so as not to waste any time. I haven't even read
over the marriage service. I haven't the vaguest idea what to do or say.

But what difference does that make! Do you see, Len? Do you see?" She
stopped and squeezed Leonard's hand, for she saw that he was suddenly
speechless. "There they are," lifting the blind, "mother and little
Herbert; and see the servants peeking from the wing."

They swept grandly around the bend in the avenue. The windows of the
great house blazed a welcome. All the sky was mother-of-pearl and
tender. In the air was the tang of spring. In the white light Marjorie
saw Leonard's lips quiver and he frowned. She had a sudden twinge of
jealousy, swallowed up by an immense tenderness.

"There's mother," he said.

"Hello, Len, old boy."

His father was on the steps. Leonard greeted him with the restraint and
the jocose matter-of-factness that exist between men who love each
other. He kissed his mother a little hungrily, just as he had when he
was a small boy back from his first homesick term at Eton, and fluttered
the heart of that frail, austere lady, who had borne this big, strapping
boy--a feat of which she was sedately but passionately proud.

Little Herbert, all clumsiness and fat legs and arms, did a good deal of
hugging and squealing, and Miss Shake, Leonard's old governess, wept
discreetly and worshipfully in the background.

"Look at 'im! Ain't he grand? Glory be to God--bless 'im, my baby!"
cried Irish Nannie, who had suckled this soldier of England; and loudly
she wept, her pride and her joy unrebuked and unashamed.

At the risk of annoying Leonard, they must follow him about, waiting
upon him at tea-time, touching him wistfully, wonderingly, for was it
not himself, their own Leonard, who had come back to them for a few
days? And instead of himself, it might have been just a name,--Leonard
Leeds,--one among a list of hundreds of others; and written opposite
each name one of the three words, Wounded, Missing, Dead.

Jealously his own family drew aside and let Marjorie go upstairs with
him alone. She had the first right; she was his bride. Mr. Leeds plucked
little Herbert back by his sailor collar and put his arm through his
wife's. Together they watched the two slender figures ascending the
broad stair-case. Each parent was thinking, "He's hers now, and they're
young. We mustn't be selfish, they have such a short time to be happy
in, poor dears."

"Looks fit, doesn't he?" said the father, cheerfully, patting his wife's
arm. Inwardly he was thinking, "How fortunate no woman can appreciate
all that boy has been through!"

"Do you think so? I thought he looked terribly thin," she answered,
absently. To herself she was saying, "No one--not even his father--will
ever know what that boy has seen and suffered."

Little Herbert, watching with big eyes, suddenly wriggled his hand from
his father's grasp.

"Wait, Leonard, wait for me! I am coming!"

Upstairs old Nannie was officiating. She was struggling with Leonard's
kit, which resembled, she thought, more the rummage box of a gypsy
pedler than the luggage of a gentleman.

The young officer had taken off his great-coat and was standing with his
back to the hearth. He loomed up very big in the demure room, a slender,
boyish figure, still too slim for his shoulder-width and height, clad in
a ragged uniform, a pistol bulging from one hip at his belt. He looked
about him at the bright hangings, with a wandering gaze that reverted to
a spot of sunlight on Marjorie's hair and rested there.

"I'm all spinning round," he said with a puzzled smile, "like a dream."

He continued to stare with dazed, smiling eyes on the sunbeam. His hair
was cropped close like a convict's, which accentuated the leanness of
his face and the taut, rigid lines about his mouth. Under his discolored
uniform, the body was spare almost to the point of emaciation. Through a
rent in his coat, a ragged shirt revealed the bare skin. He looked at it
ruefully, still smiling. "I'm rather a mess, I expect," he said. "Tried
to fix up in the train, but I was too far gone in dirt to succeed much."

Marjorie, with the instinct of a kitten that comforts its master, went
up to him and rubbed her head against the torn arm.

"Don't," he said, hoarsely; "I'm too dirty." He put out a hand, and
softly touched her dress. "Is it pink?" he asked, "or does it only look
so in this light? It feels awfully downy and nice."

She noticed that two of his nails were crushed and discolored, and the
half of one was torn away. She bent down and kissed it, to hide the
tears which were choking her. She felt his eyes on her, and she knew
that look which made her whole being ache with tenderness--that numb,
dazed look. She had seen it before in the eyes of very young soldiers
home on their first leave--mute young eyes that contained the
unutterable secrets of the battlefield, but revealed none. She had seen
them since she came to England, sitting with their elders, gray-haired
fathers who talked war, war, war, while the young tongues--once so
easily braggart--remained speechless.

What had they seen, these silent youngsters--sensitive, joyous children,
whom the present day had nurtured so cleanly and so tenderly? Their
bringing-up had been the complex result of so much enlightened effort.

War, pestilence, famine, slaughter, were only names in a history book to
them. They thought hardship was sport. A blithe summer month had plunged
them into the most terrible war of the scarred old earth. The
battlefields where they had mustered, stunned, but tingling with vigor
and eagerness, were becoming the vast cemeteries of their generation.

The field where lay the young dead was their place in the sun. The still
hospital where lay the maimed was their part in a civilization whose
sincerity they had trusted as little children trust in the perfection of
their parents.

Beside the army of maimed and fallen boys was another shadowy army of
girls in their teens and sweet early twenties--the unclaimed
contemporaries of a buried generation.

There was a fumbling at the door-handle and a small, muffled voice came
from the corridor:--
"I say, Len; I say, Marjorie, can I come in?" And in he walked, spotless
and engaging, in a white sailor suit with baggy long trousers, his hair
still wet from being tortured into corkscrew curls. "I'm all dressed for
the party," he announced; "I'm not going to bed at all to-night."


Each generation takes a special pleasure in removing the household gods of
its parents from their pedestals, and consigning them to the cupboard. The
prophet or pioneer, after being at first declared to be unintelligible or
absurd, has a brief spell of popularity, after which he is said to be
conventional, and then antiquated. We may find more than one reason for
this. A movement has more to fear from its disciples than from its
critics. The great man is linked to his age by his weakest side; and his
epigoni, who are not great men, caricature his message and make it
ridiculous. Besides, every movement is a reaction, and generates
counter-reactions. The pendulum swings backwards and forwards. Every
institution not only carries within it the seeds of its own dissolution,
but prepares the way for its most hated rival.

His eyes were on a level with Leonard's pistol; he put his little pink
face close to it lovingly, but drew back again, puckering up his small
nose.


Eventually, still without trial or recourse, Bahá’u’lláh was released from
prison and immediately banished from His native land, His wealth and
properties arbitrarily confiscated. The Russian diplomatic representative,
who knew Him personally and who had followed the Bábí persecutions with
growing distress, offered Him his protection and refuge in lands under the
control of his government. In the prevailing political climate, acceptance
of such help would almost certainly have been misrepresented by others as
having political implications. Perhaps for this reason, Bahá’u’lláh
chose to accept banishment to the neighboring territory of Iraq, then
under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. This expulsion was the beginning of
forty years of exile, imprisonment, and bitter persecution.

Leonard grinned. "You never got as near as this to any poor man who is
half as dirty as I am, old dear."

"You've got just half an hour to dress for dinner, and we're due in the
church at eight," said Marjorie.

She paused in the doorway, a slim figure in a crumpled white dress.

Perhaps the atmosphere of Leicester Square in the eighteenth, as in the
twentieth, century was a little theatrical. Of course the faults of a
man and the merits of his work are distinct and stand apart from one
another, but we are too apt to look at Reynolds the man in the light of
Goldsmith's epitaph, and it is the failing of popular biography to
supply popular people with a measure of moral equipment that would make
a saint self-conscious. It is far more interesting to see great men as
they lived.

"It's awfully tough on you, honey, to have it this way; no new clothes
or anything fixed up, and,"