-LA MÈRE BAUCHE-


THE Pyreneean valley in which the baths of Vernet are situated is not
much known to English, or indeed to any travellers.  Tourists in search
of good hotels and picturesque beauty combined, do not generally extend
their journeys to the Eastern Pyrenees.  They rarely get beyond Luchon;
and in this they are right, as they thus end their peregrinations at the
most lovely spot among these mountains, and are as a rule so deceived,
imposed on, and bewildered by guides, innkeepers, and horse-owners, at
this otherwise delightful place, as to become undesirous of further
travel.  Nor do invalids from distant parts frequent Vernet.  People of
fashion go to the Eaux Bonnes and to Luchon, and people who are really
ill to Baréges and Cauterets.  It is at these places that one meets
crowds of Parisians, and the daughters and wives of rich merchants from
Bordeaux, with an admixture, now by no means inconsiderable, of
Englishmen and Englishwomen.  But the Eastern Pyrenees are still
unfrequented.  And probably they will remain so; for though there are
among them lovely valleys—and of all such the valley of Vernet is perhaps
the most lovely—they cannot compete with the mountain scenery of other
tourists-loved regions in Europe.  At the Port de Venasquez and the
Brèche de Roland in the Western Pyrenees, or rather, to speak more truly,
at spots in the close vicinity of these famous mountain entrances from
France into Spain, one can make comparisons with Switzerland, Northern
Italy, the Tyrol, and Ireland, which will not be injurious to the scenes
then under view.  But among the eastern mountains this can rarely be
done.  The hills do not stand thickly together so as to group themselves;
the passes from one valley to another, though not wanting in altitude,
are not close pressed together with overhanging rocks, and are deficient
in grandeur as well as loveliness.  And then, as a natural consequence of
all this, the hotels—are not quite as good as they should be.

But there is one mountain among them which can claim to rank with the Píc
du Midi or the Maledetta.  No one can pooh-pooh the stern old Canigou,
standing high and solitary, solemn and grand, between the two roads which
run from Perpignan into Spain, the one by Prades and the other by Le
Boulon.  Under the Canigou, towards the west, lie the hot baths of
Vernet, in a close secluded valley, which, as I have said before, is, as
far as I know, the sweetest spot in these Eastern Pyrenees.

The frequenters of these baths were a few years back gathered almost
entirely from towns not very far distant, from Perpignan, Narbonne,
Carcassonne, and Bézières, and the baths were not therefore famous,
expensive, or luxurious; but those who believed in them believed with
great faith; and it was certainly the fact that men and women who went
thither worn with toil, sick with excesses, and nervous through
over-care, came back fresh and strong, fit once more to attack the world
with all its woes.  Their character in latter days does not seem to have
changed, though their circle of admirers may perhaps be somewhat
extended.

In those days, by far the most noted and illustrious person in the
village of Vernet was La Mère Bauche.  That there had once been a Père
Bauche was known to the world, for there was a Fils Bauche who lived with
his mother; but no one seemed to remember more of him than that he had
once existed.  At Vernet he had never been known.  La Mère Bauche was a
native of the village, but her married life had been passed away from it,
and she had returned in her early widowhood to become proprietress and
manager, or, as one may say, the heart and soul of the Hôtel Bauche at
Vernet.

This hotel was a large and somewhat rough establishment, intended for the
accommodation of invalids who came to Vernet for their health.  It was
built immediately over one of the thermal springs, so that the water
flowed from the bowels of the earth directly into the baths.  There was
accommodation for seventy people, and during the summer and autumn months
the place was always full.  Not a few also were to be found there during
the winter and spring, for the charges of Madame Bauche were low, and the
accommodation reasonably good.

And in this respect, as indeed in all others, Madame Bauche had the
reputation of being an honest woman.  She had a certain price, from which
no earthly consideration would induce her to depart; and there were
certain returns for this price in the shape of déjeuners and dinners,
baths and beds, which she never failed to give in accordance with the
dictates of a strict conscience.  These were traits in the character of
an hotel-keeper which cannot be praised too highly, and which had met
their due reward in the custom of the public.  But nevertheless there
were those who thought that there was occasionally ground for complaint
in the conduct even of Madame Bauche.

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agog with stirring affairs.

The baths were taken at different hours according to medical advice, but
the usual time was from five to seven in the morning.  The déjeuner or
early meal was at nine o’clock, the dinner was at four.  After that, no
eating or drinking was allowed in the Hôtel Bauche.  There was a café in
the village, at which ladies and gentlemen could get a cup of coffee or a
glass of eau sucré; but no such accommodation was to be had in the
establishment.  Not by any possible bribery or persuasion could any meal
be procured at any other than the authorised hours.  A visitor who should
enter the salle à manger more than ten minutes after the last bell would
be looked at very sourly by Madame Bauche, who on all occasions sat at
the top of her own table.  Should any one appear as much as half an hour
late, he would receive only his share of what had not been handed round.
But after the last dish had been so handed, it was utterly useless for
any one to enter the room at all.

The years between 1749 and 1752, devoted by Reynolds to studying and
copying the Vatican frescoes and the pictures of Padua, Milan, Turin,
and Paris, were invaluable. Indeed he was one of the greatest copyists
of his time, and Sir Walter Armstrong thinks that one of his copies of a
Rembrandt is classed among the originals in the National Gallery
to-day!

The early nineteenth century was a period of messianic expectations in
many lands. Deeply disturbed by the implications of scientific inquiry and
industrialization, earnest believers from many religious backgrounds
turned to the scriptures of their faiths for an understanding of the
accelerating processes of change. In Europe and America groups like the
Templers and the Millerites believed they had found in the Christian
scriptures evidence supporting their conviction that history had ended and
the return of Jesus Christ was at hand. A markedly similar ferment
developed in the Middle East around the belief that the fulfillment of
various prophecies in the Qur’án and Islamic Traditions was imminent.

And thus she walked her path through the world, a stern, hard, solemn old
woman, not without gusts of passionate explosion; but honest withal, and
not without some inward benevolence and true tenderness of heart.
Children she had had many, some seven or eight.  One or two had died,
others had been married; she had sons settled far away from home, and at
the time of which we are now speaking but one was left in any way subject
to maternal authority.

Adolphe Bauche was the only one of her children of whom much was
remembered by the present denizens and hangers-on of the hotel, he was
the youngest of the number, and having been born only very shortly before
the return of Madame Bauche to Vernet, had been altogether reared there.
It was thought by the world of those parts, and rightly thought, that he
was his mother’s darling—more so than had been any of his brothers and
sisters,—the very apple of her eye and gem of her life.  At this time he
was about twenty-five years of age, and for the last two years had been
absent from Vernet—for reasons which will shortly be made to appear.  He
had been sent to Paris to see something of the world, and learn to talk
French instead of the patois of his valley; and having left Paris had
come down south into Languedoc, and remained there picking up some
agricultural lore which it was thought might prove useful in the valley
farms of Vernet.  He was now expected home again very speedily, much to
his mother’s delight.

That she was kind and gracious to her favourite child does not perhaps
give much proof of her benevolence; but she had also been kind and
gracious to the orphan child of a neighbour; nay, to the orphan child of
a rival innkeeper.  At Vernet there had been more than one water
establishment, but the proprietor of the second had died some few years
after Madame Bauche had settled herself at the place.  His house had not
thrived, and his only child, a little girl, was left altogether without
provision.

This little girl, Marie Clavert, La Mère Bauche had taken into her own
house immediately after the father’s death, although she had most
cordially hated that father.  Marie was then an infant, and Madame Bauche
had accepted the charge without much thought, perhaps, as to what might
be the child’s ultimate destiny.  But since then she had thoroughly done
the duty of a mother by the little girl, who had become the pet of the
whole establishment, the favourite plaything of Adolphe Bauche, and at
last of course his early sweetheart.

The necessary changes would have come about earlier but for the French
Revolution and the war. The former caused a panic which now seems to us
exaggerated. But we are accustomed to revolutions, and know that they
never last more than a few years; the French Revolution was the first of
its kind. Moreover, France had long been the acknowledged leader of
civilisation, and a general overturn in that country terrified men like
Gibbon into prophesying that a similar outbreak was likely to overwhelm
law, order and property in England. They did not realise how different the
conditions were in the two countries. The most modest democratic reforms
were therefore impossible till Napoleon was out of the way, and till the
anti-revolutionary panic had subsided.

That any one should ever fall in love with Marie Clavert had never
occurred to Madame Bauche.  She had always regarded the child as a child,
as the object of her charity, and as a little thing to be looked on as
poor Marie by all the world.  She, looking through her green spectacles,
had never seen that Marie Clavert was a beautiful creature, full of
ripening charms, such as young men love to look on.  Marie was of
infinite daily use to Madame Bauche in a hundred little things about the
house, and the old lady thoroughly recognised and appreciated her
ability.  But for this very reason she had never taught herself to regard
Marie otherwise than as a useful drudge.