-THE Female Soldier; Or, The Surprising LIFE and ADVENTURES OF HANNAH SNELL-

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

And this Deponent further maketh Oath, and saith, That she has delivered
to Robert Walker, Printer, in the Little Old-Bailey, London, a full
and true Account of the many surprizing Incidents, and wonderful Hardships
she underwent during the Time she was in his Majesty's Service as
aforesaid, to be by him printed and published.

And this Deponent lastly saith, That she has not given the least Hint of
her surprising Adventures to any other Person, nor will she, this
Deponent, give any the Least Account thereof, to any Person whatsoever, to
be printed or published, save and except the above-mentioned Robert
Walker.

But the pendulum sometimes swings very slowly, and oscillates within
narrow limits; while at other times the changes are violent and rapid. The
last century and a half, beginning with what Arnold Toynbee was the first
to call the Industrial Revolution, has been a period of more rapid change
than any other which history records. The French Revolution, which
coincided with its first stages, helped to break the continuity between
the old order and the new, and both by its direct influence and by the
vigorous reactions which it generated cleft society into conflicting
elements. Then followed a Great War, which shook the social structure to
its base, and awakened into intense vitality the slumbering enthusiasm of
nationality. At the same time, a variety of mechanical inventions gave man
an entirely new control over the forces of nature and a new knowledge of
the laws of nature, and this new knowledge, not content with practical
applications, soon revolutionised all the natural sciences, and profoundly
affected both religion and philosophy. The reign of Queen Victoria, which
I have chosen to mark the limits of my survey to-day, covered the latter
half of this saeculum mirabile, the most wonderful century in human
history.

  Witness
                Susannah Gray,
      Sister of the said Hannah Snell.

                T. Edwards.

            Her
      Hannah  x  Snell,
           Mark.

In this dastardly Age of the World, when Effeminacy and Debauchery have
taken Place of the Love of Glory, and that noble Ardor after warlike
Exploits, which flowed in the Bosoms of our Ancestors, genuine Heroism, or
rather an extraordinary Degree of Courage, are Prodigies among Men. What
Age, for Instance, produces a Charles of Sweden, a Marlborough, or a
Prince Eugene? These are Rara Aves in Terris, and when they appear,
they seem to be particularly designed by Heaven, for protecting the Rights
of injured Nations, against foreign Oppression, securing the Privileges
of Innocence from the dire Assault of Prey and Rapine; and, in a Word,
vindicating the common Prerogatives of human Nature, from the fatal
Effects of brutal Rage, the love of Conquest, and an insatiable Lust after
Power. The amazing Benefit arising to Mankind from such illustrious and
exalted Characters, is, perhaps, the principal Reason why they attract the
Eyes, and command the Attention of all who hear of them, even in Quarters
of the World far remote from their Influence and Sphere of Action: Why
they are the Subjects of the Poets Song, the Founders of the Historian
Narration, and the Objects of the Painters Pencil; all which have a
Tendency to transmit their Names with immortal Glory to latest Ages, and
eternize their Memories, when their Bodies are mouldred into Dust, and
mingled with their Parent Earth. Perhaps their Rarity may also contribute,
in a great Measure, to that Esteem and Veneration, which the World thinks
fit to pay them: But sure if Heroism, Fortitude, and a Soul equal to all
the glorious Acts of War and Conquest, are Things so rare, and so much
admired among Men; how much rarer, and consequently how much more are they
to be admired among Women? In short, we may on this Occasion, without any
Hyperbole, use the Words of Solomon, and say, One Man among a thousand
have I found, but among Women not so. However, tho' Courage and warlike
Expeditions, are not the Provinces by the World allotted to Women since
the Days of the Amazons, yet the female Sex is far from being destitute
of Heroinism. Cleopatra headed a noble Army against Mark Anthony, the
greatest Warrior of his Time. Semiramis was not inferior to her in
Courage. The Arcadian Shepherdesses are as memorable for their Contempt
of Danger as their darling and beloved Swains. But among all our Heroines,
none comes more immediately under our Cognizance, nor, perhaps, more
merits our Attention than the remarkable Hannah Snell, whose History is
highly interesting, both on Account of the Variety of amazing Incidents,
and the untainted Veracity with which it is attended. Some People guided
rather by the Suggestions of Caprice, than the Dictates of Reason and a
sound Understanding, have foolishly imagin'd, that Persons of low and
undistinguished Births, hardly ever rais'd themselves to the Summit of
Glory and Renown; but they will find themselves widely mistaken, when they
reflect on a Kauli-Kan, a Cromwell, and many others I could mention.

By far the most dramatic of these millennialist movements had been the one
in Persia, which had focused on the person and teachings of a young
merchant from the city of Shiraz, known to history as the Báb. For nine
years, from 1844 to 1853, Persians of all classes had been caught up in a
storm of hope and excitement aroused by the Báb’s announcement that the
Day of God was at hand and that He was himself the One promised in Islamic
scripture. Humanity stood, He said, on the threshold of an era that would
witness the restructuring of all aspects of life. New fields of learning,
as yet inconceivable, would permit even the children of the new age to
surpass the most erudite of nineteenth-century scholars. The human race
was called by God to embrace these changes through undertaking a
transformation of its moral and spiritual life. His own mission was to
prepare humanity for the event that lay at the heart of these
developments, the coming of that universal Messenger of God, “He Whom God
will make manifest,” awaited by the followers of all religions.

Hannah Snell, was born in Fryer-Street, in the Parish of St. Hellen's,
in the City of Worcester, on the 23d Day of April, 1723. Her Parents,
tho' not immensely Rich by the hereditary Gifts of Fortune, yet secured a
Competency, which not only placed them above Contempt, but also enabled
them to bring up, and educate a numerous Family, none of whom have
miscarried for want either of sufficient Learning from Masters, or
salutary Advices and virtuous Examples from their Parents. And though Mrs.
Hannah Snell did not while she was at School learn to write, yet she
made a tolerable Progress in the other Part of Education common to her
Sex, and could read exceeding well.

Though the Father of our Heroine was no more than a Hosier and Dyer,
yet he was the Son of the illustrious Capt. Lieut. Sam. Snell, for so I
may or rather must call him, since with Intrepidity he stood the Brunt of
the Wars in the latter End of King William's Reign, signalized himself
at the taking of Dunkirk and served faithfully in the English Army
during Queen Anne's Wars.

Italy turned the dross of Reynolds' art to fine gold, and he never
shrank from acknowledging the debt. Had he stayed in England he might
have been a greater man than all his contemporaries, save Gainsborough
and Romney, but he could not have given the world any one of the
pictures that are reproduced here. Art will not yield to inspiration
alone. The musician, or the literary man, with very simple education may
be able to achieve wonders, but the artist who looks to brushes and
colours for his medium must sacrifice diligently for many years at the
shrine of technique before his hand can express what is in his brain.

The Son of this illustrious Man of whom we have here treated, and Father
of our Heroine, was possessed of many excellent Gifts, particularly
Courage, for which he was distinguished; yet never had an Opportunity of
displaying his Bravery in the Field of Battle, his Genius leading him
another Way, to wit, Trade, into which he entered very young, and
prospered in the World, married to his liking, and in a few Years saw
himself the Father of nine promising Children, three of which were Sons,
and six Daughters, all of whom save one Daughter, were either Soldiers or
Sailors, or intermarried with them. The eldest of the Sons, Samuel
Snell, incapable of Restraint, and void of all Fear, listed himself a
Soldier in Lord Robert Manners's Company in the first Regiment of
Foot-Guards, commanded by his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland;
when he was draughted to go for Flanders, where he received his mortal
Wound at the battle of Fontenoy; and being sent to the Hospital at
Doway, he there expired.

Tho' the Daughters were, by those who knew them, accounted aimable Women,
both on Account of their Persons and their Virtue; yet I shall pass over
the Characters of five of them in Silence, and only take Notice of that of
Hannah, the youngest of them but one, who is the Heroine of this
Subject. It is a common Thing to observe a Family dispersed, when the
Heads of that Family are either laid in their Graves, or by accidental
Calamities rendered incapable of supporting it longer. Accordingly, when
the Father and Mother of Hannah died, Hannah came up to London, and
arrived in Town on Christmas-Day, 1740, and resided for some Time, with
her Sister in Wapping.

Some Time after she came to London, she contracted an Acquaintance with
one James Summs, a Sailor, who was a Dutchman; this Acquaintance was
gradually improved into a Familiarity, and this Familiarity soon created a
mutual, tho' not a criminal Passion; for in a little Time, Summs made
his Addresses to her as a Lover, and gained her Consent, and was married
to her at the Fleet, on the sixth Day of January, 1743-4. But all his
Promises of Friendship, proved Instances of the highest Perfidy, and he
turn'd out the worst and most unnatural of Husbands. Since, tho' she had
Charms enough to captivate the Heart, and secure the Affection of any
reasonable Man, yet she was despised and contemned by her Husband, who not
only kept criminal Company with other Women of the basest Characters, but
also made away with her Things, in Order to support his Luxury, and the
daily Expences of his Whores. During this unlucky Period of the Husband's
Debauchery, she poor Woman proved with Child, and at the same Time felt
all the Shocks of Poverty, without exposing her Necessities to her nearest
Friends. But at last, her Pregnancy laid the Foundation for her passing
through all the Scenes, thro' which she has wandered; for when she was
seven Months gone with Child, her perfidious Husband finding himself
deeply involv'd in Debt, made an Elopement from her. Notwithstanding these
her Calamities, she patiently bore herself up under them, and in two
Months after her Husband's Departure was delivered of a Daughter which
lived no more than seven Months, and was decently interred at her own
Expence at St. George's Parish in Middlesex.

From the Time of her Husband's Elopement till the Time she put on Man's
Cloaths, she continued with her Sister, who is married to one James
Gray, a House Carpenter, in Ship-street, Wapping, and from whence she
took her Departure unknown to any, and was never heard of until her
Return; and with whom she now dwells.

As she was now free from all the Ties arising from Nature and
Consanguinity; she thought herself privileged to roam in quest of the Man,
who, without Reason, had injured her so much; for there are no Bounds to
be set either to Love, Jealousy or Hatred, in the female Mind. That she
might execute her Designs with the better Grace, and the more Success, she
boldly commenced a Man, at least in her Dress, and no doubt she had a
Right to do so, since she had the real Soul of a Man in her Breast.