-Notes on Old Peterborough-


CHAPTER: PREFACE

The astonishing progress in all measurable values which marked the first
half of the reign produced a whole literature of complacency. I quoted
some examples of the language which was then common, in my Romanes Lecture
on 'The Idea of Progress.' Macaulay supplies some of the best examples. We
must remember that the progress was real, and that its speed was
unexampled in history. The country was, in vulgar language, a going
concern, as it never was before and has not been since. The dominions
beyond the seas were being peopled up and consolidated. At home education
was spreading, liberty was increasing, and the light taxes were raised
with an ease.

Additionally interesting must they prove in the case of a City which has
developed from a comparatively small parish into a populous industrial,
commercial and residential Centre.  The Peterborough Archæological
Society has in these circumstances undertaken the duty of preserving and
circulating in compact form the very valuable personal Recollections of
Mr. Andrew Percival.  In doing so the Society acknowledges its
indebtedness to that gentleman for his ready permission to entrust them
to its charge.  The writer of this Preface was present at the old
Wentworth Rooms, at Peterborough, in the years 1883–4, when the addresses
which formed the basis of this chronicle were delivered.  He thus felt a
continuity of interest when the manuscript was recently committed to him
to prepare, with illustrations, for advance publication in the
“Peterborough Advertiser,” in September, 1905, and in bringing up to
date, during the indisposition of the Author, several of the
chronological and statistical references.  Otherwise the Notes remain
exactly as set down and corrected by Mr. Percival.  The Society expresses
its thanks to Mr. A. C. Taylor for the use of the very excellent photo of
Mr. Percival which forms the frontispiece; to Mr. T. N. Green (Ball &
Co.) for the Photo of the Old Bridge; and to Mr. Geo. C. Caster for the
use of “Whittlesey Mere” block, from “Fenland Notes & Queries”; most of
the others having been specially taken and engraved for this Publication.
                                                                     F. L.


CHAPTER: PART THE FIRST


WHEN I came to Peterboro’ in Oct., 1833, I think our population was five
or six thousand.  In the month of August I came down to make arrangements
for my being articled to the late Mr. Gates.  I was taken charge of by my
father, and protected by my sister, and we drove from Northampton, where
my father was a medical man having an extensive practice, and could only
spare one day.  During the night a most extraordinary storm sprang up.

We had to go back during that storm.  There was an enormous destruction
of timber on the road between here and Northampton, and in many other
parts of the country.  It was a storm such as very seldom rages in these
latitudes in the summer months.  In one part of the journey was a great
avenue of trees, a considerable portion of which was destroyed.  It was
the property of a worthy squire, and I remember hearing it remarked, “How
much Mr. So-and-So will feel the destruction of his avenue.”  “Oh dear
no,” said the person spoken to, “don’t you know that that property is
settled property, and he has no power of cutting timber, and he will be
highly delighted.  He thinks the avenue is much improved, as it puts a
very good sum of money into his pocket, which is very welcome to him.”

You see it is an ill wind that blows nobody good.

When one turns to consider English art in the eighteenth century, the
name of Joshua Reynolds stands out in a brighter light than any
other. One would not say that he was the greatest painter of his
time--Gainsborough's gifts exceeded his in many directions, and Romney
enters into competition too--but Reynolds was born under a fortunate
star, and Nature gave him as a birthday present a rare mixture of
talent, industry, and common-sense, together with a sober judgment that
could not be turned aside by passion or emotion. Such gifts, if they do
not always create a genius, may enable their possessor to achieve work
that has certain affinities with the masterpieces of the immortals.

The system that our forefathers adopted for encouraging communication and
traffic was this: They put a toll on for their pavements, from the
payment of which they exempted themselves, and took it from the strangers
that came into the place.  The only exceptions were when the inhabitants
of the place travelled on Sundays.  Toll collectors were then authorised
to take toll from them, and also from those who hired vehicles in the
place, the result being if you were an inhabitant of the place, and had
the luck to keep your carriage or gig or wagon, or whatever it was, you
might use the pavement as much as you pleased, and pay nothing.  But if
you were a poor person, or could only treat yourself occasionally with
the luxury of a gig, or were obliged to hire a trap for business, yon
were immediately taken toll of.

The present Hospital or Infirmary was then a private dwelling-house.  The
Dispensary which existed then was a small house opposite the Old Burial
Ground, the one now occupied by Mr. Payling, the dentist.  After some
years, it was removed from this place to what is now the Police Station
in Newtown.  Soon after this, the Earl Fitzwilliam purchased the present
building and presented it to the City, a monument of his appreciation of
the good that had been done in a small way by the existing buildings, and
which, I think, in the present arrangements, fully carried out his
Lordship’s benevolent wishes.

He completed the series with his wonted fiery zeal and rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly pursuing his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Buckles’ Brewery was certainly a very remarkable one, and carried on with
great energy and spirit.  There was one peculiarity they had—that some
friends of the partners could assemble on Easter Monday and spend the
afternoon in playing at marbles.  I have spent pleasant afternoons there
on Easter Mondays.  There were two large tuns or barrels in which the
beer was kept, one of which was called Mrs. Clarke, and the other the
Duke of York, to perpetuate a scandal at the time when they were
constructed.  A very hospitable time always followed the game at marbles.

Buckles’ Brewery was the cause of another peculiar circumstance.  On one
occasion there visited the town for the amusement of the people, a
calculating boy.  He went through, his entertainment with great success,
and at last one of our worthy inhabitants got up and asked the question
“How many gallons does Mr. Buckles’ great copper hold?”  The boy said he
could not tell.  “No; I thought you could not,” was the reply.  Our
worthy citizen had forgotten to give the dimensions of the copper, and
went away rejoicing over the fact that he had puzzled the calculating
boy!

He reminds me very much of a story one has heard in connection with our
own professional experience.  A witness was called to prove an assault,
which consisted in a man having been knocked down by a stone thrown at
him.  The counsel was anxious to ascertain the size of the stone.  The
witness said “do you want to know how big it was?”  “Yes,” said the
counsel.  “The size do you mean?”  “Yes.”  “Well, it was biggish.”

“Well, I want you to tell me how big it was”!  “Well, sir, if you want me
to tell you how big it was, I should think it was as big as a lump o’
chalk.”  Now, I think the gentleman who put the question about the
copper, and the witness, must have been very nearly related.


Eventually, still without trial or recourse, Bahá’u’lláh was released from
prison and immediately banished from His native land, His wealth and
properties arbitrarily confiscated. The Russian diplomatic representative,
who knew Him personally and who had followed the Bábí persecutions with
growing distress, offered Him his protection and refuge in lands under the
control of his government. In the prevailing political climate, acceptance
of such help would almost certainly have been misrepresented by others as
having political implications. Perhaps for this reason, Bahá’u’lláh
chose to accept banishment to the neighboring territory of Iraq, then
under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. This expulsion was the beginning of
forty years of exile, imprisonment, and bitter persecution.

There was a man known as “Old John Frisby,” who was not quite “all
there,” and this man went after the coach with the letter bag, and
overtook it at Stilton.  The poor man was under the impression that he
had done the State a great service and thought he ought to receive a
pension, and he daily expected it until his death.

The Mail Coaches were very comfortable for travelling in fine weather,
and an eight or ten hours’ journey was very pleasant, providing you did
not ride inside.  A journey to London and Edinburgh occupied two whole
days and nights.  The expense of such a mode of travelling was very
great, being five or six times as much as the ordinary first class
railway fare.  Every fifty or sixty miles the Coachman would touch his
hat and say, “I leave you here, sir,” which meant that you were to give
him a fee.  The guard would do the same, and when your luggage was put
up, the ostler came to you.  If you travelled post or in “a yellow and
two,” as it was called, you had to pay 1s. 6d. a mile, beside the toll
bars, and 3d. a mile for the post boy, as well as something more that he
always expected.  The 3d. a mile for the post boy, as his regular fee, is
about equal to the highest first class railway fare that is paid on any
railway in the country.

Just conceive what a change there is in the communication and you do not
wonder that the introduction of the railway system has made a stationary
nation into a nation of travellers.  After a time things did improve a
little.  The Birmingham Railway was made at considerable cost.  When I
wanted to go to Northampton, for many years I had to get up at six
o’clock in the morning, hire a gig to go to Thrapston, where I caught the
Cambridge coach, which ran in connection with the coach at Oxford.  It
cost about £4 to go home and come back again.  When the Blisworth railway
was opened, a coach was set up from Lynn to Blisworth six days in the
week.  This was a great convenience, and was very well supported.  There
were two coachmen.  One was very grave and serious and the other light
and frivolous.  Everybody knew them very well indeed.  It was very
amusing to travel with them.