-THE INDIANS OF CARLSBAD CAVERNS NATIONAL PARK-


CHAPTER: ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


This booklet was prepared as an elementary basis for those interested in
the Indians of this section. It is far from complete but if it answers
only one question—the effort was well spent.

It is rare that research into any subject is done alone. This is no
exception, for many are responsible in their contributions.

First, without the help, comments and criticism of Erik Reed this paper
would have been nought. Then thanks must go to Charlie Steen and Stanley
Stubbs for their pottery identification which helped establish the
various time phases.

The persons listed in the bibliography represent the true basis of
learning and I unhesitatingly refer one and all to them.

To Lynn Coffin for his encouragement and comments, grateful
acknowledgement is made. To Bob Barrel for his help—talk, photos and
all—thanks are extended.

Families are restricted whenever the parents have social ambitions and a
standard of comfort. Where they have none, the vital statistics are those
of Russia, Ireland, India and China.

The map, head sketches and photos not credited are by the author.

This is dedicated to my wife, Marie.


CHAPTER: THE INDIANS OF CARLSBAD CAVERNS NATIONAL PARK


The Indian story of the Park is quite complicated for several reasons.

First, we cannot confine our story to the man-made boundaries of today,
but to the natural geographic features which are mainly the Guadalupe
Mountains. Second, we must deal with more than one group of people and
outside cultural influences of each group. These groups, however, will
be confined mostly to New Mexico and north and west Texas. Then, too,
long periods of time must be taken into consideration.

So, let us start our story with man’s first entry into the new world
some 15 to 25,000 years ago. Most archaeologists agree that man came
from Asia via the Bering Straits, perhaps by a land bridge or over the
ice. Undoubtedly many migrations over a long period of time were made by
various small groups of peoples. These first people were nomadic
followers of game and perhaps gatherers of seeds. Steadily moving
southward, they eventually reached what is now southeastern New Mexico
and north and west Texas. How long they lived here, where they went and
who their ancestors were are unknown. Theory plus material evidence
suggest that they may have evolved into what archaeologists call the
Cochise complex to Basketmaker to Pueblo, with deviations in all groups.

Yet, at the present time there is not enough evidence this last happened
that simply, so we shall attempt to present the evidence as interpreted
for each group or groups coming into contact with Carlsbad Caverns
National Park and adjacent areas.

There appears to be a long time-lag between Early Man and our next
group, the Basketmakers. Positive proof indicates that the Basketmakers
were here before 900 A.D., and possibly as early as 4000 years ago. Our
Basketmakers, which are not to be confused in any manner with the San
Juan Basketmakers, were a rather isolated group and tended to remain
that way through numerous outside influences. While Pueblo groups to the
west and north were progressing in agriculture, architecture, and
esthetic arts, our group, because of their environment, remained more or
less stable in their mode of life—hunter, and gatherers of seeds—in an
area totally unsuitable for agriculture.

Next to enter our area were the Apaches from the north after 1300
A.D.(?) Whether they exerted pressure on the Basketmakers we do not
know. After the Apaches acquired horses from the Spanish, thus making
them mobile, different groups moved to other parts of New Mexico and
Arizona. Branching to the south and southeast were the Mescalero and
Lipan bands. The Mescalero band settled in an area which included the
Guadalupe Mountains and surrounding districts whence they raided the
Pueblo Indians and the Spanish until about 1725, when another Plains
group, the Comanches, came into the country from the northeast. By
pushing the Apaches north and west, the Comanches controlled a
tremendous portion of the Southern Plains.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disaster. But there was still France upon the high seas.

Many of these midden circles are found throughout the entire area and
will be explained more fully in the chapter on the Carlsbad
Basketmakers.

During the earlier decades of this century, this development was
relatively obscure. Bahá’u’lláh’s writings forbid the aggressive
proselytism through which many religious messages have been widely
promulgated. Further, the priority which the Bahá’í community gave to the
establishment of groups at the local level throughout the entire planet
militated against the early emergence of large concentrations of adherents
in any one country or the mobilization of resources required for
large-scale programs of public information. Arnold Toynbee, intrigued by
phenomena that might represent the emergence of a new universal religion,
noted in the 1950s that the Bahá’í Faith was then about as familiar to the
average educated Westerner as Christianity had been to the corresponding
class in the Roman empire during the second century A.D.

Upon first viewing the Caverns entrance, one readily notices the steep
slope downward and the sheer drop to the floor of the Bat Cave section,
and how, at the bottom of this drop, there is built up a sizeable pile
of rubble. From this rubble and the bat guano deposits that led away
from it in all directions have come numerous skeletal remains, burnt and
worked stone, and fragments of woven articles, such as bags, sandals,
and baskets. Burials were also found in the small solution pockets or
holes seen in the vicinity of the paintings in the entrance proper.

The Indians living any length of time in this area were concerned
primarily with obtaining food, and this was a constant struggle. So,
from this practical point of view, they wouldn’t have any business going
into what we now call the scenic sections of the cave. On the other hand
we cannot say they did not go down, because we know man’s curiosity can
get the better of him sometimes. It is very logical to assume that, over
the long period of time man has been in and around the area, someone
climbed down and looked.

Some people are of the assumption that the superstitious nature of the
Indians kept them out of the cave. True, man has always been somewhat
afraid of the dark and will probably always be so. That the Indians were
superstitious of the bats, which fly out the entrance each summer
evening in search of night-flying insects, is very questionable. First
of all, if the people were afraid of the bats they would not have lived
under the entrance overhang. This writer could find only one instance
where bats were regarded other than “little brothers,” and this was a
myth among the Guiana Indians of South America that concerned “big bats
that suck humans dry of blood,” and also a “large bat that would carry
people off.” The bats and night owls raided together, but the people
overcame their fear and killed them.

Animals did not, as a rule, inhabit the cavern, so the Indians would not
be down there hunting. Animals did from time to time stumble in; and, in
1946, there was found the skeletal remains of an extinct ground sloth.

Beneath the entrance have been found skeletons of many small animals
that died either from the fall or starvation.

Thus, we cannot say that the Indians went into the cave any distance,
nor can we say that they did not, simply because we do not know.

To fully understand and appreciate the story of any group or groups of
people, one must be acquainted somewhat with the country in which they
lived. The country inhabited by the Indians of Carlsbad Caverns National
Park has a wide temperature and altitude range, and four life zones
(Upper and Lower Sonoran, Canadian, and Transition). The Guadalupe
Mountains developed from a limestone reef laid down in a shallow sea
during the Permian period of the earth’s history, over 200 million years
ago. They are cut with many deep canyons containing numerous caves, but
have little permanent water. Plant and animal life are abundant and
varied. Due mainly to the lack of water, agriculture was not practiced
in this particular area. The economy was one known as “hunting and
gathering.”

Perhaps a brief description of each group that lived, hunted, and
visited in this area will best picture how and why they did.


CHAPTER: EARLY MAN


About all we can say for Early Man and the Park is that he was here. The
only material remains found was a Folsom-like projectile point. This
point was discovered in Burnet Cave in the Guadalupe Mountains in direct
association with extinct animal bones.


There are certain men born to every generation who approach life with
the complete assurance of distinction in any work that they may have
chosen for the exercise of their gifts. They are strangers to doubt and
uncertainty; they disarm Fortune by claiming freely as a right what she
is accustomed to grant grudgingly as a favour--"they ride Life's lists
as a knight might ride." One feels that these fortunate few are destined
for success just as the majority are doomed to failure, that nothing
save a long series of mishaps can keep them from the goal of their
ambition. They have the temperament that makes achievement easy, and a
steadfast determination that the demons of mischance cannot resist for
long.

It is safe to assume that he dressed in skins, if he dressed at all.

Whether caves were used as shelter we do not know; but quite probably
they were, as the climate was pluvial.

The method of projection for the point mentioned likely was done either
via a lance or the atlatl (spearthrower and dart). The latter is nothing
more than a stick with a nock for the dart on one end. It extends and
gives more leverage to the arm for throwing.

Where did he go? Some call him Folsom man; others say he is of the
Cochise complex. He may have stayed where his descendants later became
what we now call the “Basketmakers.”


CHAPTER: THE CARLSBAD BASKETMAKERS


The true occupants of Carlsbad Caverns National Park were a group of
Indians known as “Basketmakers.” They may have been descendants of the
early people, or perhaps a new and distinct group. This name was applied
because these people made excellent baskets and other woven objects, and
had some similarity in culture traits to the San Juan Basketmakers or
Anasazi of the Four Corners area. Moreover, there is some similarity in
culture traits to the Big Bend Basketmakers of Texas and the Ozark Bluff
Dwellers. Perhaps the name best suited for this group would be “cave
dwellers,” as they used caves of all sizes, from small overhangs to
those of huge proportions, for shelter. Yet, it must be remembered that
seasonally they lived in the open. However, to avoid later confusion, we
shall refer to them as the Carlsbad Basketmakers.

The Carlsbad Basketmakers were an unusual group only “here and there
adopting a few cultural traits from their neighbors, but essentially
remaining food gatherers and hunters,” a rather simple state of culture
as compared to their contemporaries.

Our group was in contact with the Mogollon people to the west before 900
A.D., and possibly 600 years earlier. Pottery found here indicates this
as well as other contacts. (See Map.) Pottery is somewhat like a
fingerprint. There are certain features about it which are peculiar to
only one particular area, and that is the area within which it was made.

Consequently, pottery can show time, trade, contact, and movement of
ceramic-making prehistoric peoples. At about this same time, social
intercourse was also being carried on with the Hueco Basketmakers to the
west and the Big Bend Basketmakers to the south.

After 1200, we find Chaco or true Anasazi influence coming into the Rio
Grande valley to Gran Quivera, thence to southeastern New Mexico. This
influence represents the Pueblo Indians who apparently changed the
Carlsbad Basketmakers’ way of life more than any other. This continued
until sometime between 1500 and 1600, when a drastic and complete change
came over all the aboriginal peoples in this section.

The Spanish entered the Southwest, bringing the horse, which prompted
this change. The Apaches had slowly been working their way southward
from sometime after 1300 A.D. By trade and theft they acquired horses
from the Spanish, and, in so doing, the long and bloody career of the
Apaches got under way. This freedom and rapidity of movement afforded by
the horse allowed them to raid, pillage, and murder Indians and Spanish
alike. It is about this time that we lose track of our Basketmakers.

What happened to them is pure supposition. The Carlsbad Basketmakers,
for defense or economic reasons, probably joined the Pueblo groups of
either the Gran Quivera or El Paso areas and became completely absorbed.

Many Pueblo traits found here contribute to this supposition, such as
pottery changes and physical changes of the people themselves. For
example, the early Carlsbad Basketmakers were long-headed individuals
(dolichocephalic).