-Campaign for Petersburg-


CHAPTER: PROLOGUE


By June 1864, when the siege of Petersburg began, the Civil War had lain
heavily on both the North and the South for more than 3 years. Most of
the fighting in the East during this period had taken place on the
rolling Virginia countryside between the opposing capitals of Washington
and Richmond, only 110 miles apart, and all of it had failed to end the
war and bring peace to the land. Various generals had been placed in
command of the Union’s mighty Army of the Potomac and had faced Gen.

Robert E. Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia. So far not one had succeeded
in destroying Lee’s army or in capturing Richmond.

Let us spend five minutes in picturing to ourselves the English nation in
a condition of stable equilibrium, as it was in the eighteenth century.

After 36 months of bitter conflict the war in the East seemed, to many
observers, to be far from a final settlement. The failure of Union
forces to deliver a decisive blow against the Army of Northern Virginia
was a source of growing concern in Washington. The Confederacy, for its
part, was no more successful in settling the issue. Attempted invasions
of the Northern States by Lee were turned back at Antietam in September
1862 and at Gettysburg in July 1863.

Farther west the picture was brighter for Northern hopes. In the same
month as the Battle of Gettysburg, the Confederate stronghold of
Vicksburg, Miss., fell into Union hands. A few days later, Port Hudson,
La., the last remaining stronghold of the Confederacy on the banks of
the Mississippi River, surrendered. Later in 1863, the Union capture of
Chattanooga, Tenn., threw open the gateway to Georgia.

Strategically, despite the stalemate in Virginia, the beginning of 1864
found the Northern armies in a stronger position than the Confederate
military forces. Not only was there a distinct possibility that the
Southern States east of the Mississippi could be split into two parts,
but the greater resources at the command of the Lincoln administration
were beginning to count more heavily with each passing day. All that
seemed to be needed to end the war was an able Union commander who could
marshal the mighty resources of his country for a last tremendous blow
at the South.

  Union Movements
  Confederate Movements
  Major Battles and Engagements
  WILDERNESS    MAY 5-7, 1864
  SPOTSYLVANIA    MAY 8-19, 1864
  COLD HARBOR    JUNE 3-13, 1864
  PETERSBURG CAMPAIGN    JUNE 1864-APRIL 1865
  FIVE FORKS    APRIL 1, 1865
  SAYLER’S CREEK    APRIL 6, 1865
Such a man was found in Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, the victor at
Vicksburg and Missionary Ridge, who was brought east and, on March 9,
1864, commissioned lieutenant general to be responsible for all the
Union armies. Unlike his predecessor, Henry W. Halleck, Grant decided
not to remain in Washington but chose instead to accompany the Army of
the Potomac, where he would provide general direction to the military
operations but leave the execution of them to that army’s commander,
Maj. Gen. George G. Meade.


CHAPTER: UNION STRATEGY 1864


May 29, 1992, marks the centenary of the passing of Bahá’u’lláh. His
vision of humanity as one people and of the earth as a common homeland,
dismissed out of hand by the world leaders to whom it was first enunciated
over a hundred years ago, has today become the focus of human hope.

It was the upper arm of the movement which was directly concerned with
Richmond and Petersburg. This was composed of two armies: the Army of
the Potomac and the Army of the James. It was the task of these armies
to capture Richmond, crush the Army of Northern Virginia, and march
south toward Sherman.

The story of the Army of the James in the early phase of the offensive
can be briefly told. Maj. Gen. Benjamin F. Butler was ordered to advance
upon Richmond from the southeast and threaten communications between the
Confederate capital and the Southern States. With some 40,000 Union
troops, the advance was begun. City Point, located at the junction of
the James and Appomattox Rivers and soon to be the supply center for the
attack on Petersburg, was captured on May 4, 1864. Within 2 weeks,
however, a numerically inferior Confederate force shut up the Army of
the James, “as if it had been in a bottle strongly corked,” in Bermuda
Hundred, a loop formed by the winding James and Appomattox Rivers. Here
Butler waited, while north of him the Army of the Potomac and the Army
of Northern Virginia engaged in a series of bloody battles.

The Battle of the Wilderness, May 5-7, 1864, began what proved to be the
start of the final campaign against the Army of Northern Virginia. Here
Meade’s Army of the Potomac, numbering approximately 118,000 troops,
fought the Confederate defenders of Richmond. Lee had about 62,000 men
with him, while an additional 30,000 under Gen. P. G. T. Beauregard held
the Richmond-Petersburg area. The battle resulted in a fearful loss of
men on both sides, although the armies remained intact. This was
followed by a series of fierce engagements around Spotsylvania Court
House from May 8 to 21.

Failing to destroy the Army of Northern Virginia in these battles, Grant
moved the Army of the Potomac to the east of Richmond. It was his hope
that he would outflank the Confederate defenders by persistent night
marches. Lee was not to be so easily outguessed, however. After minor
battles at the North Anna River (May 23) and Totopotomoy Creek (May 29),
Grant arrived at Cold Harbor, about 8 miles northeast of Richmond, but
Lee’s army still stood between him and that city. On June 3, 2 days
after he arrived at Cold Harbor, Grant ordered a direct frontal assault
against the Confederate lines. He was repulsed with heavy losses—about
7,000 men. “I have always regretted that the last assault at Cold Harbor
was ever made,” Grant would write many years later. By the end of the
first month of Grant’s campaign, both sides had suffered heavy
casualties, but the North’s ability to refill its depleted ranks was
greater than the South’s. Lee’s offensive strength had been sapped. From
the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House until the end of the war, except
for counterattacks and the lunge at Fort Stedman during the siege of
Petersburg, the Army of Northern Virginia was a defensive weapon only.

After Cold Harbor, Grant decided to turn quickly to the south of
Richmond and isolate the city and the defending troops by attacking
Petersburg and cutting the railroads that supplied them. Lee knew he
could not allow this to happen. “We must destroy this army of Grant’s
before he gets to James River,” he told one of his generals. “If he gets
there, it will become a siege, and then it will be a mere question of
time.”


CHAPTER: STRATEGIC PETERSBURG


According to the United States census of 1860, Petersburg was a city of
18,266 people. It was situated on the southern bank of the Appomattox
River about 8 miles from City Point, where the Appomattox joins the
James, and 23 miles south of Richmond. As the war progressed and the
territory to the north and east was shut off, Richmond became
increasingly dependent on Petersburg for supplies. Through it passed a
constant stream of war materials and necessities of life from the South
to sustain the straining war effort. In short, Petersburg was a road and
rail center of vital importance to the Confederacy, and its capture
would almost certainly lead to the abandonment of Richmond.

The transportation vehicles of the 1860’s did not require the wide,
straight highways of the present. However, several good roads came into
the city from the east, south, and west where they joined with the
Richmond Turnpike. Along these roads passed supply wagons, couriers,
and, on occasion, troops on their way to repel the foe. Several were
built of logs laid across the road to form a hard surface. Because of
this they were called “plank roads.” Two of the most important arteries
of traffic into Petersburg were the Jerusalem Plank Road, connecting
Petersburg with Jerusalem (now Courtland), Va., and the Boydton Plank
Road which led south through Dinwiddie Court House. Among others of
importance were the City Point, Prince George Court House, Baxter,
Halifax, Jordon Point, Squirrel Level, and Cox Roads.

It was the railroads more than the highways, however, which gave to
Petersburg a significance out of all proportion to its size. Tracks
radiated from the city in all directions. The Richmond and Petersburg
Railroad left the city to the north; the Southside Railroad ran west to
Lynchburg; the Petersburg and Weldon Railroad led south to North
Carolina; the Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad passed through a ravine
east of the city before turning southeast toward Norfolk; and the
Petersburg and City Point Railroad struck out for the hamlet of City
Point, situated at the junction of the James and Appomattox Rivers about
8 miles away.

Because of its proximity, Petersburg became a part of the transportation
system of the Confederate capital, serving as a major point of transfer
to the larger metropolis for products and materials from the vast
regions to the south and southwest. By June 1864, all but one railroad
from the south and west into Richmond—the Richmond and Danville
Railroad—passed through Petersburg. As other lines of supply were cut
off or threatened, the dependence of Richmond upon Petersburg increased
and made the security of that city a matter of vital concern.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come. But the careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Ludovico Caracci and Guido had given him hints that were of infinite
value in the moulding of his technique; for colour he had gone to
Titian, Tintoretto, and Rubens, of whom the last named was beginning to
lose his appeal in the last years of Reynolds' life. Sir Joshua had a
supreme facility for taking from every artist the best that was in him,
melting it in the crucible of his own thought, and applying the product
to his pictures. There is no doubt that the sixteenth-century Venetians
impressed Reynolds as much as they impressed Ruskin at a later date, but
in the middle of the eighteenth century the school of Bologna was in
the ascendant in England, and it is through Reynolds' actions rather
than his words that we see how Venice had influenced him. Sir Walter
Armstrong thinks that Reynolds lived well rather than wisely in Italy,
and that when he came back to town his wild oats were all sown, but it
is hard to find any justification for the belief that Reynolds was at
any time of his life a free liver. The pleasures of the table may have
claimed him when he reached middle age; indeed, Dr. Johnson said to him
on one occasion, "You complain about the tea I drink, but I do not count
the glasses you empty," or words to that effect. As far as other forms
of dissipation go, there is no evidence that Reynolds was ever a victim
to them. He was always perfect master of his self-control, and when the
years had toned down certain faults of thought and manner, he became
mellowed, like old wine, and not less stimulating.

On several occasions raids were made on the railroads south and west of
Petersburg. The most serious of these occurred on June 9, 1864, when
3,000 infantry and 1,300 cavalry appeared in force along the eastern and
southeastern sector of the Dimmock Line. The infantry contented itself
with a menacing demonstration, but the cavalry attacked up the Jerusalem
Plank Road. After breaking through the defenses, the horse soldiers were
checked by regular Southern army units assisted by a hastily summoned
home guard of old men and youths. The damage done by such raids was
quickly patched up, but they were a constant nuisance to the city’s
transportation lines. To shut off permanently the supplies that streamed
along the railroads, the Union forces would have to take permanent
physical possession of them.


CHAPTER: BATTLE OF PETERSBURG


After the Battle of Cold Harbor on June 3, Grant had abandoned, for a
time at least, his plan to capture Richmond by direct assault. With
characteristic zeal he had ordered Meade to move the Army of the Potomac
across the James River and to invest the more southerly city. On June
14, Grant and Butler conferred at Bermuda Hundred. At that time, orders
were given for the attack on Petersburg.

The first of the Northern forces to arrive on the scene of battle was
the XVIII Corps of the Army of the James, which had fought at Cold
Harbor. Early in the morning of June 15, these troops, commanded by Maj.

Gen. W. F. “Baldy” Smith, crossed from Bermuda Hundred to the south side
of the Appomattox by means of a pontoon bridge at Broadway Landing.

Eighteen thousand Union soldiers were on their way to face less than
4,000 under Beauregard. Throughout the day they approached the city and
assembled for the attack.