-THE DEATH OF THE LION-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


I had simply, I suppose, a change of heart, and it must have begun when I
received my manuscript back from Mr. Pinhorn.  Mr. Pinhorn was my
“chief,” as he was called in the office: he had the high mission of
bringing the paper up.  This was a weekly periodical, which had been
supposed to be almost past redemption when he took hold of it.  It was
Mr. Deedy who had let the thing down so dreadfully: he was never
mentioned in the office now save in connexion with that misdemeanour.
Young as I was I had been in a manner taken over from Mr. Deedy, who had
been owner as well as editor; forming part of a promiscuous lot, mainly
plant and office-furniture, which poor Mrs. Deedy, in her bereavement and
depression, parted with at a rough valuation.  I could account for my
continuity but on the supposition that I had been cheap.  I rather
resented the practice of fathering all flatness on my late protector, who
was in his unhonoured grave; but as I had my way to make I found matter
enough for complacency in being on a “staff.”  At the same time I was
aware of my exposure to suspicion as a product of the old lowering
system.  This made me feel I was doubly bound to have ideas, and had
doubtless been at the bottom of my proposing to Mr. Pinhorn that I should
lay my lean hands on Neil Paraday.  I remember how he looked at me—quite,
to begin with, as if he had never heard of this celebrity, who indeed at
that moment was by no means in the centre of the heavens; and even when I
had knowingly explained he expressed but little confidence in the demand
for any such stuff.  When I had reminded him that the great principle on
which we were supposed to work was just to create the demand we required,
he considered a moment and then returned: “I see—you want to write him
up.”

“Call it that if you like.”

“And what’s your inducement?”

“Bless my soul—my admiration!”

The experience of Divine Revelation, touched on only at secondhand in
surviving accounts of the lives of the Buddha, Moses, Jesus Christ, and
Muḥammad, is described graphically in Bahá’u’lláh’s own words:
During the days I lay in the prison of Ṭihrán, though the galling weight
of the chains and the stench-filled air allowed Me but little sleep, still
in those infrequent moments of slumber I felt as if something flowed from
the crown of My head over My breast, even as a mighty torrent that
precipitateth itself upon the earth from the summit of a lofty mountain.

“Whatever there is we should have it all to ourselves, for he hasn’t been
touched.”

This argument was effective and Mr. Pinhorn responded.  “Very well, touch
him.”  Then he added: “But where can you do it?”

“Under the fifth rib!”

Mr. Pinhorn stared.  “Where’s that?”

“You want me to go down and see him?” I asked when I had enjoyed his
visible search for the obscure suburb I seemed to have named.

Down to the year of the Italian journey the young painter's life had
been quite uneventful. Born in 1723 at Plympton in Devonshire, where his
father was a school-master, he was apprenticed in London to Thomas
Hudson, a portrait painter of the day and a Devon man too. Hudson gave
his pupil Guercino's drawings to copy. Before the time of apprenticeship
had expired Reynolds had quarrelled with his master and gone back to
Devonshire, where he painted work that was of no great importance, under
the patronage of the first Lord Edgcumbe. At his house Reynolds met the
Commodore Keppel, whose kindness enabled him to see Italy, and it was
the sojourn in that real home of art that brought Reynolds back to
England a portrait painter of the first class.

Unregenerate as I was I could read the queer implications of this speech.
The present owner’s superior virtue as well as his deeper craft spoke in
his reference to the late editor as one of that baser sort who deal in
false representations.  Mr. Deedy would as soon have sent me to call on
Neil Paraday as he would have published a “holiday-number”; but such
scruples presented themselves as mere ignoble thrift to his successor,
whose own sincerity took the form of ringing door-bells and whose
definition of genius was the art of finding people at home.  It was as if
Mr. Deedy had published reports without his young men’s having, as
Pinhorn would have said, really been there.  I was unregenerate, as I
have hinted, and couldn’t be concerned to straighten out the journalistic
morals of my chief, feeling them indeed to be an abyss over the edge of
which it was better not to peer.  Really to be there this time moreover
was a vision that made the idea of writing something subtle about Neil
Paraday only the more inspiring.  I would be as considerate as even Mr.
Deedy could have wished, and yet I should be as present as only Mr.
Pinhorn could conceive.  My allusion to the sequestered manner in which
Mr. Paraday lived—it had formed part of my explanation, though I knew of
it only by hearsay—was, I could divine, very much what had made Mr.
Pinhorn nibble.  It struck him as inconsistent with the success of his
paper that any one should be so sequestered as that.  And then wasn’t an
immediate exposure of everything just what the public wanted?  Mr.
Pinhorn effectually called me to order by reminding me of the promptness
with which I had met Miss Braby at Liverpool on her return from her
fiasco in the States.  Hadn’t we published, while its freshness and
flavour were unimpaired, Miss Braby’s own version of that great
international episode?  I felt somewhat uneasy at this lumping of the
actress and the author, and I confess that after having enlisted Mr.
Pinhorn’s sympathies I procrastinated a little.  I had succeeded better
than I wished, and I had, as it happened, work nearer at hand.  A few
days later I called on Lord Crouchley and carried off in triumph the most
unintelligible statement that had yet appeared of his lordship’s reasons
for his change of front.  I thus set in motion in the daily papers
columns of virtuous verbiage.  The following week I ran down to Brighton
for a chat, as Mr. Pinhorn called it, with Mrs. Bounder, who gave me, on
the subject of her divorce, many curious particulars that had not been
articulated in court.  If ever an article flowed from the primal fount it
was that article on Mrs. Bounder.  By this time, however, I became aware
that Neil Paraday’s new book was on the point of appearing and that its
approach had been the ground of my original appeal to Mr. Pinhorn, who
was now annoyed with me for having lost so many days.  He bundled me
off—we would at least not lose another.  I’ve always thought his sudden
alertness a remarkable example of the journalistic instinct.  Nothing had
occurred, since I first spoke to him, to create a visible urgency, and no
enlightenment could possibly have reached him.  It was a pure case of
profession flair—he had smelt the coming glory as an animal smells its
distant prey.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II.


I may as well say at once that this little record pretends in no degree
to be a picture either of my introduction to Mr. Paraday or of certain
proximate steps and stages.  The scheme of my narrative allows no space
for these things, and in any case a prohibitory sentiment would hang
about my recollection of so rare an hour.  These meagre notes are
essentially private, so that if they see the light the insidious forces
that, as my story itself shows, make at present for publicity will simply
have overmastered my precautions.  The curtain fell lately enough on the
lamentable drama.  My memory of the day I alighted at Mr. Paraday’s door
is a fresh memory of kindness, hospitality, compassion, and of the
wonderful illuminating talk in which the welcome was conveyed.  Some
voice of the air had taught me the right moment, the moment of his life
at which an act of unexpected young allegiance might most come home to
him.  He had recently recovered from a long, grave illness.  I had gone
to the neighbouring inn for the night, but I spent the evening in his
company, and he insisted the next day on my sleeping under his roof.  I
hadn’t an indefinite leave: Mr. Pinhorn supposed us to put our victims
through on the gallop.  It was later, in the office, that the rude
motions of the jig were set to music.  I fortified myself, however, as my
training had taught me to do, by the conviction that nothing could be
more advantageous for my article than to be written in the very
atmosphere.  I said nothing to Mr. Paraday about it, but in the morning,
after my remove from the inn, while he was occupied in his study, as he
had notified me he should need to be, I committed to paper the main heads
of my impression.  Then thinking to commend myself to Mr. Pinhorn by my
celerity, I walked out and posted my little packet before luncheon.  Once
my paper was written I was free to stay on, and if it was calculated to
divert attention from my levity in so doing I could reflect with
satisfaction that I had never been so clever.  I don’t mean to deny of
course that I was aware it was much too good for Mr. Pinhorn; but I was
equally conscious that Mr. Pinhorn had the supreme shrewdness of
recognising from time to time the cases in which an article was not too
bad only because it was too good.  There was nothing he loved so much as
to print on the right occasion a thing he hated.  I had begun my visit to
the great man on a Monday, and on the Wednesday his book came out.  A
copy of it arrived by the first post, and he let me go out into the
garden with it immediately after breakfast, I read it from beginning to
end that day, and in the evening he asked me to remain with him the rest
of the week and over the Sunday.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER III.

Fluctuations in prices had much to do with the miseries of the hungry
thirties and forties; but over-population, as the economists of the time
pointed out with perfect justice, was one of the main causes. It was not
till much later that there was food enough for all; and this was the
result of the new wheat fields of America and the sheep walks of
Australia, which brought in food and took away mouths. In Ireland the
barbarous and illiterate peasantry multiplied till the population exceeded
eight millions, when the inevitable famine illustrated nature's method of
dealing with recklessness. The only error with which the economists of
this time may be charged was that they did not realise that
over-population is the result of a very low standard of civilisation.