-MOLLY, THE DRUMMER BOY: A Story of the Revolution-


CHAPTER: I. - HOW DEBBY LOST HER FATHER.


Before there was a Molly, there was a Debby Mason, and with her we must
deal first.

One July morning, over a hundred years ago there stood in a forlorn room
of a log house in Plymouth, a tall, severe looking woman in rich
apparel, and a ragged desperate child of fourteen. On the floor in a
drunken stupor, lay a man.

“See, lass,” said the woman, “there lies thy father quite drunk. Look at
thyself; in rags thou art, and shamefully neglected.”

“But I love my father!” Debby blazed forth, “and when he awakens who,
pray, is to care for him if I go away?”

“But I tell thee, child, he hath joined this wild crew who are headed
for Boston, and thou wilt be turned on the town.”

“’Tis a lie!” screamed the girl, “he did not know when he promised. He
would not leave me, but even if he did he would come back, he always
does!”

Mrs. Lane paused, not knowing how further to explain the truth to the
wild child.

Reynolds is not the less a great painter because he did not happen to be
the great man so many of his biographers have seen, nor was he a
heaven-sent genius of the kind that flutters the musical dovecots from
time to time. Infant prodigies are hardly known in the world of art,
and Reynolds started life as a clever young man determined to make a
name. He became soon a painter strong enough to realise his own
limitations and those of his age, and to take the best possible steps to
secure for his own art, and incidentally for that of his country, the
highest position in the esteem of the world at large. Had there been no
Reynolds there might have been no Royal Academy--the Institution in its
earliest days was indebted very deeply to him. Himself far above the
squabbles of the hour, he raised the Royal Academy into the serene and
almost untroubled atmosphere in which he lived his life.

Debby stared in bewilderment, then slowly the truth dawned upon her.

Old Thomas Martin had been ordered from the town, and poor Jack bound
out to Elder Morris. It was quite plain, her father was to go also, out
into that somewhere of silence and absence, and she was bound out to
Mrs. Lane like a slave; she, proud, free Debby Mason!

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, daughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

Just then the man upon the floor stirred and roused; after many
exertions he sat up. One look at his little daughter and Mrs. Lane
steadied him.

“Good morning!” he smiled foolishly; “I’m afraid I’ve taken a drop too
much again. Debby, child, don’t take on so, I’m going away so that I
won’t disgrace you any more. There’s going to be trouble sure as you
live, and I’m going to fight. If I come back, lass, I’ll be a man.”

He arose clumsily and stood before the woman and girl with downcast
eyes. Debby grew white to the lips.

It was true then. He was going away. After all she had borne and
suffered for his sake, he was turning his back upon her, leaving her to
fare as she might. Little poor Debby knew of patriotism, or the new talk
of war and a republic; she had not even that hope to help her bear this
blow.

Just then, down the street came a straggling company of men and boys
headed by a drum and fife. As they drew near Mason stood straighter and
taking from the wall a rusty gun, staggered to the door. Mrs. Lane drew
Debby back.

“Come on, Mason,” called the men; “if they don’t want you in Plymouth,
you’ll soon be wanted out yonder. There’s plenty of room in Boston for
men like you and us.”

Mason reeled on. Debby could not let him slip from her without one more
struggle. She broke away from Mrs. Lane and ran after the swaying
figure.

“Father!” she cried, “take me with you! I love you! I love you! Remember
what mother said!”

The man stood still, sobered for a moment by that magic name.

“Lass,” he whispered putting his arms about her, “all they said in the
meeting was true. I’m going to be a man, so help me God for her sake and
yours—or I won’t come back!”

“Come on Billy!” yelled the crowd, “Deb can do without you!”

Clinging to her father poor Debby’s rage and despair rose. She shook her
fist at the laughing mob.

“You’re a mad lot!” she cried, “the whole town is mad to take my father
from me. I curse you all! I curse you every one for what you have done!”

The men laughed loudly.

“Bring your drum, Deb, and come along,” called one. “You need not part
with the old man. You’re as good as a lad any day, and a better fighter
I swear than your daddy. Come on and drum us to victory.”

Debby stooped and picked up a stone, then flung it into the crowd. An
oath came from the man hit and in the excitement Mason, with bowed head
joined the yelling rabble.

“Shame on thee, lass!” cried Mrs. Lane laying firm hands on the sobbing
girl, “who would ever think thy mother was a lady? The town hath done
well to try and save thy soul and body. Thou art possessed of a devil.

Follow me!”

The door of the wretched home was closed. Nothing mattered any more.

Meekly enough Debby followed her rescuer up the hill to the white house
on the top. Poor Debby! in the neat home, with plenty to eat and decent
clothing she was absolutely miserable.

Since her mother had died five years before she had led a wild
uncared-for existence. Among her father’s rude companions she had shared
food and drink, when there was any, and had gone hungry and cold without
complaint when times were hard.

In Mrs. Lane’s well ordered life and home, she was a worse outcast than
amid the poverty and shame. There she had at least the love of the poor
wretched father who, when he was sober, remembered the past, and
lavished affection upon her. With Mrs. Lane she was watched, distrusted
and whipped for misdeeds, and under the new order of things her soul and
body were in a very bad way indeed. With a burning longing she fretted
in silence for news of her father, but how could she hope, in Mrs.
Lane’s loyal home, to hear of the doings of the wild rebels who were
defying their King and his laws?

It mattered little to Debby whether her father was Whig or Tory, no
matter what he was she hungered for him day and night.

There was one other thing Debby hungered for, that was her drum; it had
been her one childish toy, the treasure of lonely years.

She had always longed to be a boy, and her drum was the concession her
father had made to her desire.

Upon it he had taught her to beat so clearly and in time, that she had
become famous among his boon companions.

But there was no place in Mrs. Lane’s house for such an unmaidenly
thing, and to save it from destruction, Debby had hidden it behind the
old home in a bit of woodland. Thither she sometimes ran when life
pressed hard, and with muffled sticks, beat frantically upon the blessed
comfort.

During the year which dragged drearily away after Mr. Mason left the
town, Debby learned to do some useful things in her new home, and she
grew straight and tall and strong; but her heart was hard and bitter.

The German Von Eicken found, in this tendency of all human movements to
provoke violent reactions, the master key of history. Every idea or
institution passes into its opposite. For instance, Roman imperialism,
which was created by an intense national consciousness, ended by
destroying the nationality of rulers and subjects alike. The fanatical
nationalism of the Jews left them a people without a country. The Catholic
Church began by renouncing the world, and became the heir of the defunct
Roman empire. In political philosophy, the law of the swinging pendulum
may act as a salutary cold douche. Universal suffrage, says Sybel, has
always heralded the end of parliamentary government. Tocqueville caps this
by saying that the more successful a democracy is in levelling a
population, the less will be the resistance which the next despotism will
encounter.

It had not always been such a sad life as Debby had last known with her
father. Once the home was neat and cosy, and dimly an old story,—a story
never finished, floated through the girl’s mind.

“Some day, child, when thou art older,” it was the mother who had
spoken, “I will tell thee of my home. Perhaps we’ll write a letter, they
may like to see thee, little lass. Try to be a lady, dear, then they
will not be ashamed of thee.” Things grew confused as Debby tried to
think, but there was one night that was ever clear. It was the last
night of the clean happy life. “Be a lady, Debby child, and whatever
happens stay with father like a good maid. Save him, dear, he was a fine
man once. He will tell thee the rest of the story some day.”

How vividly Debby remembered clinging to the poor mother and sobbing out
the promise to stay with father. After that scene all was confusion and
misery. The untold story was never finished or asked for. Uncared-for
and neglected poor Debby became an outcast among decent children, and
the butt of the reckless ones.

During the earlier decades of this century, this development was
relatively obscure. Bahá’u’lláh’s writings forbid the aggressive
proselytism through which many religious messages have been widely
promulgated. Further, the priority which the Bahá’í community gave to the
establishment of groups at the local level throughout the entire planet
militated against the early emergence of large concentrations of adherents
in any one country or the mobilization of resources required for
large-scale programs of public information. Arnold Toynbee, intrigued by
phenomena that might represent the emergence of a new universal religion,
noted in the 1950s that the Bahá’í Faith was then about as familiar to the
average educated Westerner as Christianity had been to the corresponding
class in the Roman empire during the second century A.D.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II. - DEBBY TAKES HER OWN WAY.


“Deborah?”

“Yes ma’am.”

“Hast thou aired thy bed and prayed in private, earnestly seeking
forgiveness for thy sins of yesterday?” Mrs. Lane came down the long
hall and eyed with disapproval the girl sitting idly on the top step of
the porch.

A sullen look passed over Debby’s face. “I’ve aired my bed,” answered
she.

“And humbly besought pardon for thy sins?”

“No, ma’am.”

“Why not, Deborah?”

“Because I haven’t been sinning.”

“Child, thy soul is in danger of eternal punishment!”

“I don’t care.” Debby had suffered so much in various forms during her
short life, that the subject had ceased to interest her.

She never trembled as did the well cared for little Puritans, over Elder
Morris’ prayers. His lurid descriptions rather charmed her. There seemed
no doubt in Plymouth but that Bill Mason was doomed, and where her
father went, Debby wanted to go too, consequently no threat could touch
her.

At the hard words Mrs. Lane grew more rigid. “For thy mother’s sake I
have sought to save thee,” she said, “I have even tried to trace her
family for I believe they were of better stock than thy vagabond father,
but I fear me, lass, that thou art an evil hearted wench. Neither hell
fire or earthly love can move thee. Mistress Knowles hath told me that
over and again thou art seen with Jack Martin; thou art a shameless
one!”

“Jack was my only friend when all the other boys and girls turned on me,
’tis not like I’d forget Jack.” There was a dangerous flash in Debby’s
eyes.

“I forbid thee ever speaking to the rascal again. Dost hear?”

“Yes.”

“Wilt thou obey?”

“No.” A cruel blow almost threw Debby from the porch. She gathered
herself up and turned a set, white face to her mistress.

“Now go to thy room, Deborah, for the love of thy soul have I chastised
thee. After evening prayers to-night I will come to thy room. If thou
art repentant, I will overlook thy insolence, but mark my words, dost
thou repeat the offence, girl, I will lay the rod across thy shoulders,
until I have conquered thy spirit. During the day,” she added, “think of
thy mother, and of how she would have grieved o’er thee.”

Debby had had a hasty answer ready for Mrs. Lane, but the last words
quieted her. Silently she shuffled to her room on the second floor far
to the back of the house. Closing the door she sank down near the window
and began to think in real earnest. The day wore wearily away. Strong,
energetic Debby chafed under the enforced idleness. She thought of her
mother, and hot stinging tears filled her eyes.

Here was her chance to be decent and respectable slipping from her,
while she was growing worse and worse. She thought of her father away
somewhere—where, she knew not, though she had pleaded with Jack Martin
to try and find out. What was the poor, weak father doing?

Perhaps he was dead, and she would never see him again! That thought
always made her strong young body quiver. Bits of strange talk, always
hushed when she drew near, came to her now in those long hours of
imprisonment. Rumors of a battle at Lexington where the farmers had
dared face the King’s men. It had never occurred to Debby before, but
perhaps her father was among those brave men. Or, perhaps, he had been
at the later battle of Bunker Hill, and had fallen fighting in the
unequal struggle, as so many other rebels had who dared to resist King
George.

Debby hated the King for no better reason than because Mrs. Lane
worshipped him. If she had only been a boy she would have fought against
him simply to spite her mistress.

The tall clock on the stairs, after plodding through the weary day, at
last struck seven, and the early gloaming began to settle o’er the
little town of Plymouth.

From below the droning voice of Mrs. Lane arose, leading the evening
devotions. How Debby loathed that service. In half an hour Mrs. Lane
would mount the stair, rod in hand, to settle her account with the
imprisoned sinner.