-GYPSY COPPERSMITHS IN LIVERPOOL AND BIRKENHEAD-


CHAPTER: 1.  EVERYWHERE STRANGERS: EVERYWHERE AT HOME.


WHEN you want to find a Gypsy the police are more likely to be able to
give you his address than directories, bankers, or ministers of religion;
and it was a Liverpool policeman who sent me to the back of the municipal
slaughter-house to seek a horde of “Hungarian” Roms whose arrival had
been announced by the evening papers.  In a squalid street, at a corner
where insanitary dwellings had been demolished, I found a vacant plot of
brick-strewn ground surrounded by high walls.  There, evidently, were my
Gypsies, for a crowd of boys had gathered round the one door, struggling
for a glance through its keyhole.  Mistaking me for a detective, they
made way, and I knocked loudly and long.

The boys were not mistaken.  There was a scene within which was worth
looking at.  The strangers had journeyed so rapidly from Marseilles to
Liverpool that they had outstripped their heavy baggage, and, arriving
before their tents, were obliged to bivouac under tiny extemporized
shelters propped against the windowless house-walls which formed two
sides of the square.  They were making the best of circumstances with
considerable success, for they had with them countless beds of eiderdown
in brilliantly coloured covers, and they had their all-important
samovars.  The men were out, but the women, protected by a
police-serjeant from the inhospitable attentions of their neighbours,
were in the camp, and into that shabby yard they had brought an
unaccustomed glory which was altogether foreign and oriental.

He who stepped through the battered door in St. Andrew Street travelled
fifteen hundred miles in a second.  Without, the slaughter-house and
slums—dull, drab Liverpool; within, the glorious East—strange dark faces
of exotic beauty, a blaze of scarlet gowns and yellow gold.  For the
women were bedizened with much jewellery: rings shone on their fingers,
barbaric bracelets on their arms, chains and corals dangled from their
necks, heavy pendants from their ears, and on their blouses sparkled many
trinkets and brooches.  Their jet-black hair hung in two plaits over
their shoulders, and in each plait was woven a cord to which were
attached six or seven great gold medals, generally Continental coins of
100 francs, but often our own magnificent five-pound pieces.  And
everywhere children gambolled—pictures of health and happiness, fawn-like
creatures whose scanty shifts scarcely concealed their lithe brown
bodies.

We were consigned for four months to a place foul beyond comparison....

There were full forty souls in the party, but when the boat arrived at
Birkenhead, Kola, the chief, held up the traffic by engaging the
ticket-collector in an altercation as to the exact number.  Since he
spoke in Russian and the official in English, neither convinced the
other.  The chief maintained that there were only fourteen; the collector
set the figure considerably higher, but as no two of his repeated
attempts at enumeration agreed with one another, while the chiefs
estimate never varied, Kola may be said to have had, on the whole, the
best of the argument.  At all events the management preferred giving way
to being detained all night, and Uncle Kola triumphantly led his
procession up the bridge.

Meanwhile a spectator passing along Green Lane, Tranmere, might have seen
a very curious spectacle in the English Gypsies’ camp, for that was the
destination of the aliens.  On a bare patch of cindery earth between the
dark brown tents of the Boswells and Robinsons, a piece of carpet had
been spread, and on it, as advanced guard awaiting the main body, sat
portly Tinka, the chief’s wife.  Cross-legged, motionless, aloof, her
eyes fixed on a distant infinity, quite alone yet totally unconcerned,
she smoked her cigarette calmly in a long meerschaum holder.  Red-robed
as ever, wearing an immense weight of solid gold, brilliant as a flame,
she contrasted strangely with the dingy colouring of the place: a Chinese
idol in a Methodist chapel would have been less incongruous.  But the
English Gypsies, aping her detachment, feigned absence of interest; no
one was visible—nevertheless many an eye was eagerly pressed to a hole in
the tent-blanket.

Then, for reasons which have never, I think, been fully explained, the
deathrate rapidly declined, at the very time when economic conditions
demanded a larger population. This is the more remarkable, when we
remember the manner in which young children were treated before the
Factory Acts.


CHAPTER: 2.  IMPERIUM IN IMPERIO.

Ludovico Caracci and Guido had given him hints that were of infinite
value in the moulding of his technique; for colour he had gone to
Titian, Tintoretto, and Rubens, of whom the last named was beginning to
lose his appeal in the last years of Reynolds' life. Sir Joshua had a
supreme facility for taking from every artist the best that was in him,
melting it in the crucible of his own thought, and applying the product
to his pictures. There is no doubt that the sixteenth-century Venetians
impressed Reynolds as much as they impressed Ruskin at a later date, but
in the middle of the eighteenth century the school of Bologna was in
the ascendant in England, and it is through Reynolds' actions rather
than his words that we see how Venice had influenced him. Sir Walter
Armstrong thinks that Reynolds lived well rather than wisely in Italy,
and that when he came back to town his wild oats were all sown, but it
is hard to find any justification for the belief that Reynolds was at
any time of his life a free liver. The pleasures of the table may have
claimed him when he reached middle age; indeed, Dr. Johnson said to him
on one occasion, "You complain about the tea I drink, but I do not count
the glasses you empty," or words to that effect. As far as other forms
of dissipation go, there is no evidence that Reynolds was ever a victim
to them. He was always perfect master of his self-control, and when the
years had toned down certain faults of thought and manner, he became
mellowed, like old wine, and not less stimulating.

And Kola intended that it should—before he left it.  That was why he had
come.  He was already rich; his pockets contained bank-notes which he
could have exchanged anywhere for several hundred golden sovereigns, and
his relations believe that he is worth £30,000.  On great occasions he
can decorate his table, which stands only fourteen inches high, with
lordly plate; a silver samovar weighing twenty-three pounds is matched by
a huge salver and an immense bucket of the same precious metal decorated
in high relief.  The weight of solid gold which his wife carries in her
hair, on her blouse, and round her neck and wrists is nothing less than
royal.  Kola is, in fact, a ruler; and, if the citizens of Liverpool took
but little interest in him and his subjects, he reciprocated their
contempt, regarding them simply as so many more or less stupid persons
who were destined to provide for him and his tribe what they were then
seeking—copper pots to mend.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, and the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Not, of course, exactly the kind we know; he would call our Gypsies
scornfully Sinte, and claim that he and his tribe alone are the Roma.

Intellectually he is a giant.  In the morning his subjects would set out
to solicit orders, returning despondently as night fell with empty hands
or single pans on their shoulders.  But Kola would march triumphantly to
the camp followed by a lorry heavily laden with cauldrons he had
collected for repair.  It was Kola who directed the work, and when any
special difficulty arose it was he who sat down and overcame it.  He was
completely illiterate; yet he used a complicated form of contract which
he dictated and his patrons wrote and signed.  It concealed artfully the
extortionate charges he proposed to make, and hoodwinked not only the
authorities of a great political club but even those of a municipal
kitchen.  And it was Kola who faced the indignant customer who came to
protest against the charge, and either browbeat him into submission or
put him into court.

The craft of the Gypsies was magnificent, and they wielded their hammers
sensitively, as if there were nerve-endings in the heads.  They were
admittedly more skilful than British coppersmiths, ready to undertake and
execute successfully work that would elsewhere be refused as impossible.

But their ideas of remuneration were grandiose, and in a country where
bargaining is a neglected science they retained an oriental habit of
demanding ten times as much as they were prepared to accept.  It mattered
not if his customers were offended—Kola never intended to see them again.

And so he and his subjects spent a few weeks in each town collecting
work, a few weeks in doing it, and a few turbulent and glorious weeks in
exacting payment.  Then they shook the dust from off the soles of their
feet, and departed for ever from the city they had exhausted.

Kola’s policy is successful; it has made him rich.  Other Gypsies have
attached themselves to his family, married his relations, and placed him
at the head of an important tribe, whose activities he regulates, whose
well-being he cares for, whose movements he directs, which he governs as
“king.”  When dissatisfaction arises the malcontents are free to migrate
to another monarchy; but so long as Kola is successful and so long as his
subjects share his success, thus long will his kingdom endure.

Kola’s kingdom should be impossible.  It is contrary to reason, contrary
at all events to what we call reason, that a community should prefer the
primitive ways of the Middle Ages to the latest improvements of modern
civilization.  His bellows were old-fashioned even in the fifteenth
century and survive now only among savages; yet in his eyes they are
still the best bellows, and if out of curiosity he were to purchase a
mechanical blower he would probably hand it over to his grandchildren for
a toy.  With pockets well lined with money he neglects to buy table
cutlery, tears his portion of bread from the loaf and scrapes it clumsily
in the butter-dish.  The luxurious chairs and sofas with which he
furnishes his royal tent are vain ostentation; guests may use them, but
Kola himself prefers to sit, as his ancestors have sat for countless
centuries, cross-legged on the ground.  Us and all that we value, with
the single exception of money, he despises even more cordially than we
despise him.  Like a drop of oil in a glass of water he and his tribe
live in our midst untouched, strangely aloof and alien, a wonderful
spectacle of an Imperium in Imperio.