-THE FIGURE IN THE CARPET-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I


I HAD done a few things and earned a few pence—I had perhaps even had
time to begin to think I was finer than was perceived by the patronising;
but when I take the little measure of my course (a fidgety habit, for
it’s none of the longest yet) I count my real start from the evening
George Corvick, breathless and worried, came in to ask me a service.  He
had done more things than I, and earned more pence, though there were
chances for cleverness I thought he sometimes missed.  I could only
however that evening declare to him that he never missed one for
kindness.  There was almost rapture in hearing it proposed to me to
prepare for _The Middle_, the organ of our lucubrations, so called from
the position in the week of its day of appearance, an article for which
he had made himself responsible and of which, tied up with a stout
string, he laid on my table the subject.  I pounced upon my
opportunity—that is on the first volume of it—and paid scant attention to
my friend’s explanation of his appeal.  What explanation could be more to
the point than my obvious fitness for the task?  I had written on Hugh
Vereker, but never a word in _The Middle_, where my dealings were mainly
with the ladies and the minor poets.  This was his new novel, an advance
copy, and whatever much or little it should do for his reputation I was
clear on the spot as to what it should do for mine.  Moreover if I always
read him as soon as I could get hold of him I had a particular reason for
wishing to read him now: I had accepted an invitation to Bridges for the
following Sunday, and it had been mentioned in Lady Jane’s note that Mr.
Vereker was to be there.  I was young enough for a flutter at meeting a
man of his renown, and innocent enough to believe the occasion would
demand the display of an acquaintance with his “last.”

Corvick, who had promised a review of it, had not even had time to read
it; he had gone to pieces in consequence of news requiring—as on
precipitate reflexion he judged—that he should catch the night-mail to
Paris.  He had had a telegram from Gwendolen Erme in answer to his letter
offering to fly to her aid.  I knew already about Gwendolen Erme; I had
never seen her, but I had my ideas, which were mainly to the effect that
Corvick would marry her if her mother would only die.  That lady seemed
now in a fair way to oblige him; after some dreadful mistake about a
climate or a “cure” she had suddenly collapsed on the return from abroad.
Her daughter, unsupported and alarmed, desiring to make a rush for home
but hesitating at the risk, had accepted our friend’s assistance, and it
was my secret belief that at sight of him Mrs. Erme would pull round.
His own belief was scarcely to be called secret; it discernibly at any
rate differed from mine.  He had showed me Gwendolen’s photograph with
the remark that she wasn’t pretty but was awfully interesting; she had
published at the age of nineteen a novel in three volumes, “Deep Down,”
about which, in _The Middle_, he had been really splendid.  He
appreciated my present eagerness and undertook that the periodical in
question should do no less; then at the last, with his hand on the door,
he said to me: “Of course you’ll be all right, you know.”  Seeing I was a
trifle vague he added: “I mean you won’t be silly.”

“Silly—about Vereker!  Why what do I ever find him but awfully clever?”

“Well, what’s that but silly?  What on earth does ‘awfully clever’ mean?
For God’s sake try to get _at_ him.  Don’t let him suffer by our
arrangement.  Speak of him, you know, if you can, as _I_ should have
spoken of him.”

In the streets of Teheran, Western observers were appalled by scenes of
Bábí victims blown from cannon mouths, hacked to death by axes and swords,
and led to their deaths with burning candles inserted into open wounds in
their bodies. It was in these circumstances, and faced with the
prospect of His own imminent death, that Bahá’u’lláh received the first
intimation of His mission:

Corvick almost groaned.  “Oh you know, I don’t put them back to back that
way; it’s the infancy of art!  But he gives me a pleasure so rare; the
sense of”—he mused a little—“something or other.”

I wondered again.  “The sense, pray, of want?”

“My dear man, that’s just what I want _you_ to say!”

Even before he had banged the door I had begun, book in hand, to prepare
myself to say it.  I sat up with Vereker half the night; Corvick couldn’t
have done more than that.  He was awfully clever—I stuck to that, but he
wasn’t a bit the biggest of the lot.  I didn’t allude to the lot,
however; I flattered myself that I emerged on this occasion from the
infancy of art.  “It’s all right,” they declared vividly at the office;
and when the number appeared I felt there was a basis on which I could
meet the great man.  It gave me confidence for a day or two—then that
confidence dropped.  I had fancied him reading it with relish, but if
Corvick wasn’t satisfied how could Vereker himself be?  I reflected
indeed that the heat of the admirer was sometimes grosser even than the
appetite of the scribe.  Corvick at all events wrote me from Paris a
little ill-humouredly.  Mrs. Erme was pulling round, and I hadn’t at all
said what Vereker gave him the sense of.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER II

The years between 1749 and 1752, devoted by Reynolds to studying and
copying the Vatican frescoes and the pictures of Padua, Milan, Turin,
and Paris, were invaluable. Indeed he was one of the greatest copyists
of his time, and Sir Walter Armstrong thinks that one of his copies of a
Rembrandt is classed among the originals in the National Gallery
to-day!

When afterwards, in the course of our gregarious walk, I found myself for
half an hour, not perhaps without another manœuvre, at the great man’s
side, the result of his affability was a still livelier desire that he
shouldn’t remain in ignorance of the peculiar justice I had done him.  It
wasn’t that he seemed to thirst for justice; on the contrary I hadn’t yet
caught in his talk the faintest grunt of a grudge—a note for which my
young experience had already given me an ear.  Of late he had had more
recognition, and it was pleasant, as we used to say in _The Middle_, to
see how it drew him out.  He wasn’t of course popular, but I judged one
of the sources of his good humour to be precisely that his success was
independent of that.  He had none the less become in a manner the
fashion; the critics at least had put on a spurt and caught up with him.
We had found out at last how clever he was, and he had had to make the
best of the loss of his mystery.  I was strongly tempted, as I walked
beside him, to let him know how much of that unveiling was my act; and
there was a moment when I probably should have done so had not one of the
ladies of our party, snatching a place at his other elbow, just then
appealed to him in a spirit comparatively selfish.  It was very
discouraging: I almost felt the liberty had been taken with myself.

I had had on my tongue’s end, for my own part, a phrase or two about the
right word at the right time; but later on I was glad not to have spoken,
for when on our return we clustered at tea I perceived Lady Jane, who had
not been out with us, brandishing _The Middle_ with her longest arm.  She
had taken it up at her leisure; she was delighted with what she had
found, and I saw that, as a mistake in a man may often be a felicity in a
woman, she would practically do for me what I hadn’t been able to do for
myself.  “Some sweet little truths that needed to be spoken,” I heard her
declare, thrusting the paper at rather a bewildered couple by the
fireplace.  She grabbed it away from them again on the reappearance of
Hugh Vereker, who after our walk had been upstairs to change something.
“I know you don’t in general look at this kind of thing, but it’s an
occasion really for doing so.  You _haven’t_ seen it?  Then you must.
The man has actually got _at_ you, at what _I_ always feel, you know.”
Lady Jane threw into her eyes a look evidently intended to give an idea
of what she always felt; but she added that she couldn’t have expressed
it.  The man in the paper expressed it in a striking manner.  “Just see
there, and there, where I’ve dashed it, how he brings it out.”  She had
literally marked for him the brightest patches of my prose, and if I was
a little amused Vereker himself may well have been.  He showed how much
he was when before us all Lady Jane wanted to read something aloud.  I
liked at any rate the way he defeated her purpose by jerking the paper
affectionately out of her clutch.  He’d take it upstairs with him and
look at it on going to dress.  He did this half an hour later—I saw it in
his hand when he repaired to his room.  That was the moment at which,
thinking to give her pleasure, I mentioned to Lady Jane that I was the
author of the review.  I did give her pleasure, I judged, but perhaps not
quite so much as I had expected.  If the author was “only me” the thing
didn’t seem quite so remarkable.  Hadn’t I had the effect rather of
diminishing the lustre of the article than of adding to my own?  Her
ladyship was subject to the most extraordinary drops.  It didn’t matter;
the only effect I cared about was the one it would have on Vereker up
there by his bedroom fire.

At dinner I watched for the signs of this impression, tried to fancy some
happier light in his eyes; but to my disappointment Lady Jane gave me no
chance to make sure.  I had hoped she’d call triumphantly down the table,
publicly demand if she hadn’t been right.  The party was large—there were
people from outside as well, but I had never seen a table long enough to
deprive Lady Jane of a triumph.  I was just reflecting in truth that this
interminable board would deprive _me_ of one when the guest next me, dear
woman—she was Miss Poyle, the vicar’s sister, a robust unmodulated
person—had the happy inspiration and the unusual courage to address
herself across it to Vereker, who was opposite, but not directly, so that
when he replied they were both leaning forward.  She enquired, artless
body, what he thought of Lady Jane’s “panegyric,” which she had read—not
connecting it however with her right-hand neighbour; and while I strained
my ear for his reply I heard him, to my stupefaction, call back gaily,
his mouth full of bread: “Oh, it’s all right—the usual twaddle!”


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when Admiral Rooke whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

Families are restricted whenever the parents have social ambitions and a
standard of comfort. Where they have none, the vital statistics are those
of Russia, Ireland, India and China.

Miss Poyle thrust her chin half across the cloth.  “Oh, you’re so deep!”
she drove home.

“As deep as the ocean!  All I pretend is that the author doesn’t see—”
But a dish was at this point passed over his shoulder, and we had to wait
while he helped himself.

“Doesn’t see what?” my neighbour continued.

“Doesn’t see anything.”

“Dear me—how very stupid!”
