-SUNDAY UNDER THREE HEADS-


CHAPTER: I - AS IT IS


THERE are few things from which I derive greater pleasure, than walking
through some of the principal streets of London on a fine Sunday, in
summer, and watching the cheerful faces of the lively groups with which
they are thronged.  There is something, to my eyes at least, exceedingly
pleasing in the general desire evinced by the humbler classes of society,
to appear neat and clean on this their only holiday.  There are many
grave old persons, I know, who shake their heads with an air of profound
wisdom, and tell you that poor people dress too well now-a-days; that
when they were children, folks knew their stations in life better; that
you may depend upon it, no good will come of this sort of thing in the
end,—and so forth: but I fancy I can discern in the fine bonnet of the
working-man’s wife, or the feather-bedizened hat of his child, no
inconsiderable evidence of good feeling on the part of the man himself,
and an affectionate desire to expend the few shillings he can spare from
his week’s wages, in improving the appearance and adding to the happiness
of those who are nearest and dearest to him.  This may be a very heinous
and unbecoming degree of vanity, perhaps, and the money might possibly be
applied to better uses; it must not be forgotten, however, that it might
very easily be devoted to worse: and if two or three faces can be
rendered happy and contented, by a trifling improvement of outward
appearance, I cannot help thinking that the object is very cheaply
purchased, even at the expense of a smart gown, or a gaudy riband.  There
is a great deal of very unnecessary cant about the over-dressing of the
common people.  There is not a manufacturer or tradesman in existence,
who would not employ a man who takes a reasonable degree of pride in the
appearance of himself and those about him, in preference to a sullen,
slovenly fellow, who works doggedly on, regardless of his own clothing
and that of his wife and children, and seeming to take pleasure or pride
in nothing.

The pampered aristocrat, whose life is one continued round of licentious
pleasures and sensual gratifications; or the gloomy enthusiast, who
detests the cheerful amusements he can never enjoy, and envies the
healthy feelings he can never know, and who would put down the one and
suppress the other, until he made the minds of his fellow-beings as
besotted and distorted as his own;—neither of these men can by
possibility form an adequate notion of what Sunday really is to those
whose lives are spent in sedentary or laborious occupations, and who are
accustomed to look forward to it through their whole existence, as their
only day of rest from toil, and innocent enjoyment.

Such a vision unfolds in the writings of Bahá’u’lláh, the nineteenth
century prophetic figure whose growing influence is the most remarkable
development of contemporary religious history. Born in Persia, November
12, 1817, Bahá’u’lláh began at age 27 an undertaking that has gradually
captured the imagination and loyalty of several million people from
virtually every race, culture, class, and nation on earth. The phenomenon
is one that has no reference points in the contemporary world, but is
associated rather with climactic changes of direction in the collective
past of the human race. For Bahá’u’lláh claimed to be no less than the
Messenger of God to the age of human maturity, the Bearer of a Divine
Revelation that fulfills the promises made in earlier religions, and that
will generate the spiritual nerves and sinews for the unification of the
peoples of the world.

They reach their places of destination, and the taverns are crowded; but
there is no drunkenness or brawling, for the class of men who commit the
enormity of making Sunday excursions, take their families with them: and
this in itself would be a check upon them, even if they were inclined to
dissipation, which they really are not.  Boisterous their mirth may be,
for they have all the excitement of feeling that fresh air and green
fields can impart to the dwellers in crowded cities, but it is innocent
and harmless.  The glass is circulated, and the joke goes round; but the
one is free from excess, and the other from offence; and nothing but good
humour and hilarity prevail.

Let us spend five minutes in picturing to ourselves the English nation in
a condition of stable equilibrium, as it was in the eighteenth century.

It was in his nineteenth year that, in this same Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in after years. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come. But the careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Down to the year of the Italian journey the young painter's life had
been quite uneventful. Born in 1723 at Plympton in Devonshire, where his
father was a school-master, he was apprenticed in London to Thomas
Hudson, a portrait painter of the day and a Devon man too. Hudson gave
his pupil Guercino's drawings to copy. Before the time of apprenticeship
had expired Reynolds had quarrelled with his master and gone back to
Devonshire, where he painted work that was of no great importance, under
the patronage of the first Lord Edgcumbe. At his house Reynolds met the
Commodore Keppel, whose kindness enabled him to see Italy, and it was
the sojourn in that real home of art that brought Reynolds back to
England a portrait painter of the first class.