-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

I do not mean that we do not enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. There is
no doubt that, with the inspiriting help of the mysterious race, and by
the force of tradition, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Christmas Day. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert, is that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcerting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exaggerated
and even false sentiment. What I mean is that we have to brace and force
ourselves up to the enjoyment of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We have to remind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitude towards Christmas, which at worst is a
vacation, may be clearly seen by contrasting it with our attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holiday. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoyment of the summer holiday. We
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeling. There is no
fear of the institution of the summer holiday losing its heartiness. Nor
do we need the example of children to aid us in savouring the August
"festivities."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific and
readily definable ailment; a condition, moreover, that hovers
precariously and bafflingly in limbo between mind and body, and he
stressed this as the theme of his Treatise of the Hypochondriack and
Hysteric Passions, Vulgarly Call'd the Hypo in Men and Vapours in Women
(1711). The mental causes are noted as well in an anonymous pamphlet in
the British Museum, A Treatise on the Dismal Effects of
Low-Spiritedness (1750) and are echoed in many similar early and
mid-eighteenth century works. Some medical writers of the age, like
Nicholas Robinson, had reservations about the external mental bases of
the hyp and preferred to discuss the condition in terms of internal
physiological causes:
     ...of that Disorder we call the Vapours, or Hypochondria; for
     they have no material distinctive Characters, but what arise from
     the same Disease affecting different Sexes, and the Vapours in
     Women are term'd the Hypochondria in Men, and they proceed from
     the Contraction of the Vessels being depress'd a little beneath the
     Balance of Nature, and the Relaxation of the Nerves at the same
     Time, which creates that Uneasiness and Melancholy that naturally
     attends Vapours, and which generally is an Intemperature of the
     whole Body, proceeding from a Depression of the Solids beneath the
     Balance of Nature; but the Intemperature of the Parts is that
     Peculiar Disposition whereby they favour any Disease.

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, he heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman but one.  This lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s having, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had brought the little
change back; it was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front teeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

     No disease is more troublesome, either to the Patient or Physician,
     than hypochondriac Disorders; and it often happens, that, thro' the
     Fault of both, the Cure is either unnecessarily protracted, or
     totally frustrated; for the Patients are so delighted, not only
     with a Variety of Medicines, but also of Physicians.... On the
     contrary, few physicians are sufficiently acquainted with the true
     Genius and Nature of this perplexing Disorder; for which Reason
     they boldly prescribe almost everything contained in the Shops, not
     without an irreparable Injury to the Patient (article on
     "Hypochondriacus Morbis").

This is a more technical description than Hill gives anywhere in his
handbook, but it serves well to summarize the background of the condition
about which Sir John wrote.

Hill's Hypochondriasis adds little that is new to the theory of the
disease. It incorporates much of the thinking set forth by the writings
mentioned above, particularly those of George Cheyne, whose medical
works The English Malady (1733) and The Natural Method of Cureing the
Diseases of the Body, and the Disorders of the Mind Depending on the
Body (1742) Hill knew. He is also conversant with some Continental
writers on the subject, two of whom--Isaac Biberg, author of The
Oeconomy of Nature (1751), and René Réaumur who had written a history
of insects (1722)--he mentions explicitly, and with William
Stukeley's Of the Spleen (1723). Internal evidence indicates that Hill
had read or was familiar with the ideas propounded in Richard
Blackmore's Treatise of the Spleen and Vapours (1725) and Nicholas
Robinson's A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy (1729).

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Wild thoughts; a sense of fullness") and causes (the poor and damp
English climate and the resultant clotting of blood in the spleen) of
the illness.

Sections V-VIII, dealing with causes and cures, are less commonplace and
display some of Hill's eccentricities as a writer and thinker. He uses
the section entitled "Cures" as a means to peddle his newly discovered
cure-all, water dock, which Smollett satirized through the mouth of
Tabitha Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771). Hill also rebelled against
contemporary apothecaries and physicians who prescribed popular
medicines--such as Berkeley's tar-water, Dover's mercury powders, and
James's fever-powders--as universal panaceas for the cure of the hyp.

"No acrid medicine must be directed, for that may act too hastily,
dissolve the impacted matter at once, and let it loose, to the
destruction of the sufferer; no antimonial, no mercurial, no martial
preparation must be taken; in short, no chymistry: nature is the shop
that heaven has set before us, and we must seek our medicine there"

(p. 24). However scientifically correct Hill may have been in minimizing
the efficacy of current pills and potions advertised as remedies for the
hyp, he was unusual for his time in objecting so strongly to them. Less
eccentric was his allegiance to the "Ancients" rather than to the
"Moderns" so far as chemical treatment (i.e., restoration of the humours
by chemical rearrangement) of hypochondriasis is concerned. "The
venerable ancients," Hill writes, "who knew not this new art, will lead
us in the search; and (faithful relators as they are of truth) will tell
us whence we may deduce our hope; and what we are to fear" (p. 24).


The tale opens abruptly with an opium-bred vision of the tower of
Cloisterham Cathedral, beheld by Jasper as he awakens in the den of the
Princess Puffer, between a Chinaman, a Lascar, and the hag herself.  This
Cathedral tower, thus early and emphatically introduced, is to play a
great but more or less mysterious part in the romance: that is certain.
Jasper, waking, makes experiments on the talk of the old woman, the
Lascar and Chinaman in their sleep.  He pronounces it “unintelligible,”
which satisfies him that his own babble, when under opium, must be
unintelligible also.  He is, presumably, acquainted with the languages of
the eastern coast of India, and with Chinese, otherwise, how could he
hope to understand the sleepers?  He is being watched by the hag, who
hates him.

     Let him begin with plants: he will here find a continual pleasure,
     and continual change; fertile of a thousand useful things; even of
     the utility we are seeking here. This will induce him to walk; and
     every hedge and hillock, every foot-path side, and thicket, will
     afford him some new object. He will be tempted to be continually in
     the air; and continually to change the nature and quality of the
     air, by visiting in succession the high lands and the low, the
     lawn, the heath, the forest. He will never want inducement to be
     abroad; and the unceasing variety of the subjects of his
     observation, will prevent his walking hastily: he will pursue his
     studies in the air; and that contemplative turn of mind, which in
     his closet threatened his destruction, will thus become the great
     means of his recovery (pp. 26-27).

Hill was forever extolling the claims of a life devoted to the study of
nature, as we see in a late work, The Virtues of British Herbs (1770).

Judicious as is the logic of this recommendation, one cannot help but
feel that the emphasis here is less on diversion as a cure and more on
the botanic attractions of "every hedge and hillock, every foot-path
side, and thicket."

While Hill's rules and regulations regarding proper diet (Section VII)
are standard, several taken almost verbatim et literatim from Cheyne's
list in The English Malady (1733), his recommendation (Section VIII)
of "Spleen-Wort" as the best medicine for the hypochondriac patient is
not. Since Hill devotes so much space to the virtues of this herb and
concludes his work extolling this plant, a word should be said about it.

Throughout his life he was an active botanist. Apothecary, physician,
and writer though he was, it was ultimately botany that was his ruling
passion, as is made abundantly clear in his correspondence. Wherever
he lived--whether in the small house in St. James's Street or in the
larger one on the Bayswater Road--he cultivated an herb garden that
flattered his knowledge and ability. Connoisseurs raved about its
species and considered it one of the showpieces of London. His arrogant
personality alone prevented him from becoming the first Keeper of the
Apothecary's Garden in Chelsea, although he was for a time
superintendent to the Dowager Princess of Wales's gardens at Kensington
Palace and at Kew. His interest in cultivation of herbs nevertheless
continued; over the years Hill produced more than thirty botanical
works, many of them devoted to the medical virtues of rare herbs such as
"Spleen-Wort." Among these are The British Herbal (1756), On the
Virtues of Sage in Lengthening Human Life (1763), Centaury, the Great
Stomachic (1765), Polypody (1768), A Method of Curing Jaundice
(1768), Instances of the Virtue of Petasite Root (1771), and Twenty
Five New Plants (1773). It is therefore not surprising that he
should believe a specific herb to be the best remedy for a complicated
medical condition. Nor is his reference to the Ancients as authority for
the herbal pacification of an inflamed spleen surprising in the light of
his researches: he was convinced that every illness could be cured by
taking an appropriate herb or combination of herbs. Whereas a few
nonmedical writers--such as John Wesley in Primitive Physick
(1747)--had advocated the taking of one or two herbs in moderate dosage
as anti-hysterics (the eighteenth-century term for all cures of the
hyp), no medical writer of the century ever promoted the use of herbs to
the extent that Hill did. In fairness to him, it is important to note
that his herbal remedies were harmless and that many found their way
into the official London Pharmacopeia.