-A CANTERBURY PILGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: First Day -Folk do go on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It was towards the end of August, when a hot sun was softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripening the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went on pilgrimage to Canterbury. Ours was no ordinary
journey by rail, which is the way latter-day pilgrims mostly travel. No.

and the furore he had excited one lovely June evening by merely
playing ninepins with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. And
after all this some wretched modern Americans were to come and offer him
the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! It was quite
unbearable. Besides, no ghost in history had ever been treated in this
manner. Accordingly, he determined to have vengeance, and remained till
daylight in an attitude of deep thought.

And so it came to pass that one close, foggy morning, we strapped our bags
to our machine and wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring but the policeman, making his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn and past Staples' Inn, very grey and venerable in the
pale light, and where the facetious driver of a donkey-cart tried to race
us; past the now silent and deserted cloisters of Christ's Hospital, and
under Bow Bells in Cheapside; past the Monument of the famous fire, and
over London Bridge, where the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, and where hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crying, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. You'll catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the second
story?' A short way up the Borough High Street, from which we had a
glimpse of the old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
and then we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have been our starting-point; but how, it suddenly occurred to us for the
first time, could we start from nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was a serious difficulty at the very
outset. But our enthusiasm was fresh. We looked up at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanging from the third story of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
substantial. And we rode on with what good cheer we could.

Then we went for some distance over the Old Kent Road, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invented, I think, for the confusion of cyclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the way. In endeavouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
and lift it out. The driver sat scowling as he looked on. If he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them things. We came to Deptford, or
West Greenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and his
fellows passed. So, in remembrance of them, we stopped a few minutes
opposite a little street full of old two-storied houses, with tiled roofs
and clustered chimney-pots and casement windows, overtopped by a distant
church steeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as a man who talked with us while we rested there said
that an old fountain had stood in the open space near by, it pleased us to
think that here had been one of the Waterings of Saint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perhaps it was at this
very spot that Davy Copperfield, a modern pilgrim who travelled the same
road, had come to a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Deptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep were peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, and two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'ouse of Prince Harthur yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in it
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsome brick house to
our left.

‘Much obliged,’ laying his hat and umbrella on the table; ‘I came early,
not to interrupt you.  The fact is, I am taken by surprise in reference
to this proposal my friend has made.’


Jasper now tells Sapsea, and the Dean, that he is to make “a moonlight
expedition with Durdles among the tombs, vaults, towers, and ruins
to-night.”

Creston had blushed and stammered over it, but in half a minute, at the
rate we live in polite society, it had practically become, for our
friend, the mere memory of a shock.  They stood there and laughed and
talked; Stransom had instantly whisked the shock out of the way, to keep
it for private consumption.  He felt himself grimace, he heard himself
exaggerate the proper, but was conscious of turning not a little faint.
That new woman, that hired performer, Mrs. Creston?  Mrs. Creston had
been more living for him than any woman but one.  This lady had a face
that shone as publicly as the jeweller’s window, and in the happy candour
with which she wore her monstrous character was an effect of gross
immodesty.  The character of Paul Creston’s wife thus attributed to her
was monstrous for reasons Stransom could judge his friend to know
perfectly that he knew.  The happy pair had just arrived from America,
and Stransom hadn’t needed to be told this to guess the nationality of
the lady.  Somehow it deepened the foolish air that her husband’s
confused cordiality was unable to conceal.  Stransom recalled that he had
heard of poor Creston’s having, while his bereavement was still fresh,
crossed the sea for what people in such predicaments call a little
change.  He had found the little change indeed, he had brought the little
change back; it was the little change that stood there and that, do what
he would, he couldn’t, while he showed those high front teeth of his,
look other than a conscious ass about.  They were going into the shop,
Mrs. Creston said, and she begged Mr. Stransom to come with them and help
to decide.  He thanked her, opening his watch and pleading an engagement
for which he was already late, and they parted while she shrieked into
the fog, “Mind now you come to see me right away!”  Creston had had the
delicacy not to suggest that, and Stransom hoped it hurt him somewhere to
hear her scream it to all the echoes.

Whitechapel and other low quarters are nearly emptied at this season. It
is pleasant to know that at least once a-year these people escape from
their smoky, squalid streets, into green places where they can breathe
pure air, but their coming is not welcomed in the country. Many poor,
honest women in towns and villages thereabouts will rather lose a few
shillings than let their children go to the hop-fields during the picking
season, lest they should come away but too much wiser than they went. As
we rode further the number of tramps increased; all the morning we passed
and overtook them. There were grey-haired, decrepit men and women, who
hobbled painfully along, and could scarcely keep pace with their more
stalwart sons and daughters; there were children by the score, some of
whom ran gaily on, forgetting fatigue for joy of the sunshine; others
lagged behind, whimpering and weary; and still others were borne in their
mothers' arms. Almost all these people were laden with their household
goods and gods. They carried heavy bags thrown over their shoulders, or
else baskets and bundles slung on their arms, and pots and kettles and all
manner of household furniture. One man, more enterprising than the
others, had brought a push-cart; when we saw it, two babies, almost hidden
in a confused mass of clothing and pots and pans, were sleeping in it, and
one clasped a kitten in her arms. Now, with a sharp bend in the road, we
came suddenly upon a man sitting under a tree, who, though we rang our
bell right in his ear, never raised his eyes from a hole in an old silk
handkerchief he was holding; and now we came to a man and woman resting on
a pile of stones by the roadside, who sat upright at the tinkling of our
bell. I shall never forget the red and swarthy face of the woman as she
turned and looked at us, her black hair, coarse and straight as an
Indian's, hanging about her shoulders and over her eyes: she was
unmistakably young in years but old in vice, and ignorant of all save
evil--compared to hers an idiot's face would have been intelligent, a
brute's refined. I could now understand why honest countrywomen kept
their children from the hop-fields. As a rule, the tramps were as
careless and jolly as Béranger's Bohemians, and laughed and made merry as
if the world and its hardships were but jests. We, as figures in the
farce, came in for a share of their mirth. 'That's right! ladies fust!'
one old tattered and torn man called after us, gaily; 'that's the
principle on which I allus hacts!' Which, I suppose, is a rough way of
saying 'Place aux dames.' A very little joke went a great way with them.

'Clear the path!' another man cried to the women walking with him, as we
coasted down the hill outside of Dartford: 'ere's a lady and gen'leman on
a happaratus a-runnin' over us!' 'They're only a 'enjoyin' of 'emselves,'
an old hag of the party added; 'so let luck go wi' 'em!' Then she laughed
loud and long, and the others joined with her, and the sound of their
laughter still reached our ears as we came into the village.

Dartford, from a cycler's point of view, is a long narrow street between
two hills, one of which is good to coast, the other hard to climb. The
place, as we saw it, was full of hucksters and waggons, and footmen and
carriages, and we passed on without stopping, save by the river that runs
near a church, with a tower and an unconventional clock looking out from
one side instead of from the centre, which is the proper place for clocks.

From Dartford to Gravesend the road became more pleasant every minute.

Here and there were brown fields, where men were ploughing, or perhaps
burning heaps of stubble, and sending pale grey clouds of smoke
heavenwards; here and there were golden meadows where gleaners were busy,
and then, perhaps, a row of tall, dark poplars, or a patch of brilliant
cabbages. To the south, broad plains, where lazy, ease-loving cattle were
grazing, stretched as far as the eye could see. To the north, every now
and then, as the road turned, we saw the river, where ships were at
anchor, and steamers were steaming up to London, and black barges, with
dark-red sails, were floating down with the tide. The water was blue as
the sky, and the hills in the distance seemed to melt into a soft purple
mist hanging over them. By the road and by the river were many deep
deserted quarries, whose white chalk cliffs could be seen from afar, while
they brought out in strong contrast the red roofs of the cottages built at
their feet. We came to one or two small villages and another church, with
its tower and a clock awry, so that we wondered whether this was a fashion
in Kent. And all along the hedges were white and pink with open
morning-glories, and the trees threw soft shadows over the white road,
and everywhere the air was sweet with the scent of clematis.

Gravesend is not a very striking place as you enter it from the road. It
was to us remarkable chiefly for the Rosherville Gardens, which hitherto
we had known only in our Dickens. But we found a pleasant 'ale-stake' by
the river, where we rested to 'both drinke and biten on a cake;' or,
rather, on substantial beefsteak and vegetables. There was no one else in
the coffee-room, but one or two dogs strayed in from the private bar, and
seeing we were at dinner became very sociable. The maid who waited on us
was friendly too, and while J. was busy putting away the tricycle she was
even moved to confide in me. She was the only maid in the house, she said.

There had been another, but she had gone some time ago; 'and there's a
jolly hard lot of work for one woman to do, ma'am,' she went on. 'I'm not
used to it, and I can't stand it much longer. I've always been in a
private before. It's easy enough to go from a private to a public, but to
get from a public to a private again is another thing. Onst in a public is
always in a public, ma'am!' Then some one called her. I was glad to have
her go, for her way of telling her trouble had in it something of the
Greek doctrine of fate, and so long as her eye was upon me I had an
uncomfortable feeling, as if I were one of the instruments decreed from
all time to work out her cheerless destiny. It was more agreeable to look
out of the window on the little lawn in front, where two comfortable
matrons were drinking beer, and a Blue-coat boy, home for the holidays,
was running around, showing his orange legs to the best advantage. It was
quiet on the river. Large steamers, small steam-tugs and row-boats, were
lying at anchor. An old coastguard hulk was moored opposite, and an
officer walked solemnly up and down the deck, every now and then halting
to look through a spyglass for suspicious craft. But as we stood on the
pier, after we had dined, the tide turned, and swiftly and silently all
the boats turned with it. Tugs gave shrill whistles in warning of their
speedy departure. Sail-boats unfurled their sails. Sailors came down the
watersteps, leading from the houses built on high walls at the water's
edge, and rowed quickly to the coastguard boat, saluted the solitary
officer, and disappeared below. In the large P. and O. steamer, anchored
at some distance from the pier, we could see the red turbans and white
tunics of Lascars moving to and fro on the decks. The river was now as
lively as it had before been quiet. But it monopolised the activity of the
place, for when we went back for our tricycle we met only one or two
seamen and a handful of children.

When we set forth again the air was warm and sleep-inspiring. This,
together with the consciousness of having well dined, it must be
confessed, made us return to the pedals unwillingly. Not even the fact
that a whole Sunday school, off for a picnic, waited to look at us, could
stimulate us into speed. A sun-dial on a church tower just outside of
Gravesend seemed to take us to task for our indolence. In large black
letters on its white face it said--
  'Be quick: your time's short!'

But we knew better. Rochester was but seven miles off, and in Rochester we
had made up our minds to sleep that night. The tramps had grown as lazy as
we, but they did not even pretend to struggle with their laziness. All
along the road we saw them lying under the hedges and in shady places.

Some were asleep, others day-dreaming. Three women had roused themselves
somewhat, and were making preparations for afternoon tea. They had kindled
a fire by the wayside, and hung their kettle over it. A little further on,
a mother and her children were just coming to the road from the deep,
sweet shade of a dingle. On the hill beyond was a grey church, with a
graveyard whose graves straggled down the hillside, and next to it a large
farmhouse, with red roof and walls, whose colour was softened and
harmonised by time. When the children saw we had stopped the machine they
ran up at once to beg us to buy queer little round calico-balls, which
they called pin-cushions. One had bright black eyes, and, not in the least
discomfited by our refusal of the balls, danced merrily around the
tricycle. Then she peered into J.'s sketch-book.

'He's drawrin!' she called to her mother, in a loud stage whisper.

The latter bade her mind her manners. But she still continued her
observations.

'Oh, mother, it's the church!' was her next cry.

'Which, I'm sure, it's a werry decent church,' the mother declared, as if
to encourage us with her approval; and then they went their way.


If the decadence of Christmas were a purely subjective phenomenon,
confined to the breasts of those of us who have ceased to be children
then it follows that Christmas has always been decadent, because people
have always been ceasing to be children. It follows also that the
festival was originally got up by disillusioned adults, for the benefit
of the children. Which is totally absurd. Adults have never yet invented
any institution, festival or diversion specially for the benefit of
children. The egoism of adults makes such an effort impossible, and the
ingenuity and pliancy of children make it unnecessary. The pantomime,
for example, which is now pre-eminently a diversion for children, was
created by adults for the amusement of adults. Children have merely
accepted it and appropriated it. Children, being helpless, are of course
fatalists and imitators. They take what comes, and they do the best they
can with it. And when they have made something their own that was adult,
they stick to it like leeches.

Of the many places on the road to Canterbury, made famous by latter-day
pilgrims, few are better known and loved than Gad's Hill, where honest
Jack Falstaff performed his deeds of valour, and where Charles Dickens
spent the last years of his life. We had counted upon making it, too, a
station by the way. But whether it was that we were just then drifting
along in lotus-eaters' fashion, our feet moving mechanically, or whether
the prospect of another long coast made us forgetful of all else, certain
it is that, with a glance of admiration at the dark spreading cedars, and
another at the inn and its sign, adorned with the picture of Falstaff, we
went by without a thought as to where we were.