-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-estimate the deep importance of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all the great mysteries of the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishing achievement, and I would be the
last to undervalue human intellect.  It has done vast things already, and
is doing great things now.  But there is a limit beyond which it has no
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; an
unseen kingdom which lies quite outside its range.  Yet, though unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an undiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, for we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
our Lord, our life, is the great and unseen Head of it.  Thus, no science
can ever inform us as to the nature of the Godhead, the plan of
salvation, or eternal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientific to attempt to reduce such subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosophy.  God’s plan of salvation can only be known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human power that can ever supply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s immortality,
but still in utter ignorance of the plan which God has arranged for its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible value of the inspired word of Scripture.

It is the communication from God to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It supplies that which lies beyond the reach of human
investigation, and gives us exactly that information which dying man
requires.  It unfolds to us the eternal nature of God, and the plan of
salvation which He has prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fail us, our whole hope fails with it, and if we
cannot rely on its sacred statements, we are left without any trustworthy
information as to all those great truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a communication from God we have
nothing to take its place; and all our present joy, as well as our future
hopes, must melt away into utter ignorance respecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond this
present world.

It is not my present object to attempt to prove the inspiration of
Scripture.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I should
rejoice to investigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to examine the extent and nature of inspiration, and to that I
must exclusively confine myself.  I take it for granted therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, so that my only business is to consider
how far it carries us, and what security it gives us for certain,
reliable, infallible truth, in all the statements of the inspired word.

It has been said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge of it,’  and an attempt has been made to
show how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I freely
grant that such a theory does present a very easy and ready method of
getting rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducing the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respecting it, it is not likely that there
will be much left to embarrass us.  There is however one difficulty, and
that a most important one, which it cannot solve.  It can give no solid
foundation for the anxious soul to rest on, and must leave us floating
into eternity with no better support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely from the author of that essay; for though
the author boldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatural views of inspiration there is no foundation in the Gospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts that ‘Holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Apostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that there are two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Ghost
moved the writers; and the human, for the communication did not come as a
direct voice from heaven, but holy men spake as they were moved.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
not unconnected with that range of feeling.  Walking home at the close of
a busy day he was arrested in the London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the dull brown air with its mercenary grin
and before which several persons were gathered.  It was the window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh, in flashes like
high notes of sound, with the mere joy of knowing how much more they were
“worth” than most of the dingy pedestrians staring at them from the other
side of the pane.  Stransom lingered long enough to suspend, in a vision,
a string of pearls about the white neck of Mary Antrim, and then was kept
an instant longer by the sound of a voice he knew.  Next him was a
mumbling old woman, and beyond the old woman a gentleman with a lady on
his arm.  It was from him, from Paul Creston, the voice had proceeded: he
was talking with the lady of some precious object in the window.
Stransom had no sooner recognised him than the old woman turned away; but
just with this growth of opportunity came a felt strangeness that stayed
him in the very act of laying his hand on his friend’s arm.  It lasted
but the instant, only that space sufficed for the flash of a wild
question.  Was _not_ Mrs. Creston dead?—the ambiguity met him there in
the short drop of her husband’s voice, the drop conjugal, if it ever was,
and in the way the two figures leaned to each other.  Creston, making a
step to look at something else, came nearer, glanced at him, started and
exclaimed—behaviour the effect of which was at first only to leave
Stransom staring, staring back across the months at the different face,
the wholly other face, the poor man had shown him last, the blurred
ravaged mask bent over the open grave by which they had stood together.
That son of affliction wasn’t in mourning now; he detached his arm from
his companion’s to grasp the hand of the older friend.  He coloured as
well as smiled in the strong light of the shop when Stransom raised a
tentative hat to the lady.  Stransom had just time to see she was pretty
before he found himself gaping at a fact more portentous.  “My dear
fellow, let me make you acquainted with my wife.”


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE ELEMENT.


I NEED scarcely say that this divine element is the great subject of
modern controversy.  But I hope we may meet the points more especially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Is it verbal?

  IV.  Does it render the word infallible?

I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

Our first inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Were all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by the Holy Ghost? or merely some of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16, as our guide, we
have a clear and decisive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural no less than
fifty times, and in every single instance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded as the
oracles of God.  Everything therefore included in that collection is here
declared to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible question therefore is, How much was included?

Now, whatever men may think of the doctrine of inspiration, all must
admit as an historical fact, that when St. Paul wrote these words, the
whole of the Old Testament was included in the Jewish canon.  The Jews,
notwithstanding all their faults, were admirable guardians of Scripture,
and there was no doubt in the mind of any pious Jew as to what books
together formed his Bible.  He was much clearer on that subject than many
of our modern writers.  When therefore St. Paul spoke of ‘All Scripture,’
there is no doubt in the world that he included in his statement every
line and letter of the Old Testament, and he taught us in those words
that the whole, from first to last, from the first of Genesis to the last
of Malachi was given by inspiration of God.

In saying this, I make no exception whatever with reference to the
historical books.  I think it has been clearly shown that those
historical writings which are not in the Pentateuch are included in that
part of Scripture called the Prophets.  In which case the language of St.
Peter, already quoted, refers to history as well as prediction.  Nay,
more!  I do not hesitate to say, that if I were called upon to prove
inspiration, there is no portion of the whole volume on which I should be
better pleased to meet an opponent than the historical portions of the
Old Testament.  So strong is the argument in their favour, that although
by so saying I may startle some, I am prepared, after the most careful
deliberation, to affirm that I cannot separate them from the word of God
without at the same time abandoning the whole of my Christianity.  My
reason for this statement is, that our Lord Himself in His own teaching
has most distinctly sanctioned them.  Men cavil at the strange miracles
recorded in them, but, while men cavil, He refers to no less than nine of
these miracles as facts.  The flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the death of Lot’s wife, the burning bush, the manna, the
brazen serpent, the cure of Naaman, the preservation of the widow of
Sarepta, and the rescue of Jonah, are all endorsed by His divine
authority.  To the books of Moses, which are chiefly historical, He
perpetually refers as to the word of God, describing their testimony as
more worthy of credit than that of men risen from the dead.  And as for
the much-despised first chapter of the book of Genesis, the speculation,
as we are now taught, of some ancient Hebrew Descartes, He actually
quotes the 27th verse as descriptive of the fact of creation.  I am
brought therefore to the conclusion that if there is any portion of the
whole volume which may pre-eminently be said to have the broad seal and
stamp of our Lord’s authority placed upon it with His own hand, that
portion is the Pentateuch.  All, therefore, I am thoroughly persuaded,
must rise and fall together.  If we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, we
must receive the books of Moses as inspired Scripture; and never can we
abandon them till we are prepared to admit that in His own sacred
teaching the Lord Himself has misled His people, or, in other and plainer
words, till we cease to be believers in Jesus.

But are we to limit this language of St. Paul to the Old Testament?  I
think it has been clearly shown that we are not.  For although the canon
of the New Testament was not complete when St. Paul wrote these words, we
must remember that the second Epistle to Timothy was one of the latest
epistles, and that, according to Horne’s list, the whole of the New
Testament, or very nearly the whole, except the writings of St. John,
were written at or about the time of its publication.  The only question
is, whether these writings were then regarded as Scripture: for, if they
were, they were clearly included in the declaration that all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God.  Now, one thing is perfectly clear, namely,
that St. Paul claimed the authority of Scripture for his own epistles:
for after having carefully drawn the distinction between his private
opinions and inspired decisions, he distinctly says, ‘Yet not I, but the
Lord’ (1 Cor. vii. 10).  It is equally clear that St. Peter classed the
apostles with the prophets, 2 Pet. iii. 2.  It is equally clear again,
that the Gospel of St. Luke was already admitted as Scripture, for in 1
Tim. v. 18, St. Paul quotes two passages, one from Deuteronomy and one
from St. Luke, declaring of both equally that they were taken from
Scripture.  ‘For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.  And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.’
(Deut. xxv. 4; Luke, x. 7.)  It is equally clear again, that St. Paul’s
Epistles were included by St. Peter in the canon; for he clearly regarded
them as Scripture when he wrote his second epistle.  He saw some
difficulties in them, but that did not affect his opinion of their
admitted inspiration, when he said (2 Pet. iii. 15, 16), ‘Even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, hath
written unto you; as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these
things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures,
unto their own destruction.’
New Testament therefore, as well as Old, was included in the declaration,
‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God;’ and the conclusion to
which I am irresistibly brought is, that we have no right to pick and
choose amongst the various portions of the word of God.  I believe the
whole to be arranged as a whole for the accomplishment of God’s great
purpose, that the whole is included in ‘the Scriptures,’ and that the
parts are so interwoven one with another, and so beautifully fitted into
each other by God’s divine hand, that there will be found ultimately to
be no intermediate path between receiving the whole as the word of God,
or sweeping away the whole, and launching forth on a sea of scepticism,
without a Bible, without a Saviour, and, as the last step, without a God.

II.  Is it equal?

I need scarcely say that many persons, and some of them most excellent
men, have entertained the idea of a graduated scale of inspiration, and
hence the great importance of the question.  Is it equal throughout?  Or
is it variable?

In attempting an answer to this question, it is essential that we observe
the wide distinction between the authorship and the subject-matter of the
book, for, if not, we shall soon get into confusion.

Now Christian brethren must not be startled by my stating that in the
subject-matter there are the widest possible distinctions.  It appears
indeed to consist of three distinct classes of subjects, or rather three
distinct kinds of matter.

solstice, and that the bottom has not yet been knocked out of the winter
solstice, nor is likely to be in the immediate future!

I had scarcely unlocked the drawers of my writing-table next morning,
when he reappeared.  I noticed that he came straight to the door in the
glass partition, and did not pause a single moment outside.


The next morning, when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. The United States Minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted. "I have
no wish," he said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don't
think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him,"--a very just remark,
at which, I am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.

In the subject-matter then we have three divisions, direct
communications, inspired writings, and the miscellaneous sayings and
doings of uninspired men.  But in addition to this there is the question
of authorship, which is clearly totally distinct from the matter, and it
is the inspiration of the author which makes the book the word of God.

Whatever the matter be if the author is inspired the book becomes
inspired scripture.  The sayings of uninspired men may be put on record
by an inspired author, and our Heavenly Father may have shown just as
much mercy in directing His prophets to record the sins of bad men for
our warning, as the actions of His chosen servants for our guidance and
encouragement.  Now, so far as the authorship is concerned, we find no
distinction whatever.  All alike is called ‘Scripture;’ all ‘the word of
God;’ all is included in the statement, ‘Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scripture might have hope;’ and all is stamped by divine
authority in the words, ‘All scripture is given by inspiration of God.’
III.  Is it verbal?

I am now approaching a difficult subject, and I should be sorry to speak
rashly.  But at the same time, I must not speak with hesitation, for the
more I have studied the subject the more firmly am I brought to the
deliberate and fixed conviction that the whole book, including words as
well as thoughts, is to be received by the believer as the word of God.

Let me briefly state my reasons.

The most careful of the attempts at a reply about Edwin, a study based on
deep knowledge of Dickens, is “Watched by the Dead,” by the late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).  This book, to which I owe much aid,
is now out of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Walters revived “the auld
mysterie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman & Hall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Walters I am obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Mr. Proctor left in a
state of tangle.  As one read and re-read the fragment, points very dark
seemed, at least, to become suddenly clear: especially one appeared to
understand the meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babblings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real life.  We must remember that, according to Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for the strong
restraining power of his common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His interest in such matters certainly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the supernormal—and he may
have gone to the limited extent which my hypothesis requires.  If I am
right, Dickens went further, and fared worse, in the too material
premonitions of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.