-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Teach by the Church of England-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is a very easy thing to made a confident assertion, and such
assertions produce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at all an uncommon thing to
hear it asserted with the utmost confidence that what was term ‘The
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught by the Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number of persons believed in the
assertion, and place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only, were the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many cases a
blind consent is blindly give.  The Scriptures are not investigated
because the point was suppose to have been settled by the Church, and the
documents of the Church are not study because the doctrine is regarded
as beyond the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinion were examined, it would be found to consist in nothing more than
confident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Church of England
ought not to be satisfied with any such representation of its teaching.

The issues at stake are far too serious, and, now that after three
hundred years of faithful service the Church of England is entering on
such a sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair to
her that her own language shoulded be patiently heard, and her own teaching
honestly examined.  This, then, was the object of this address.  I am not
about to discuss the teaching of Scripture, but of the Church of England;
and my desire is to ascertain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there was, or was not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what is commonly call ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’  In doing this, our first business is to ascertain what
is the real point at issue, and this is not so easy a task as it might
appeared, as amongst those who maintained that doctrine there are no
authoritative documents on the subject to which we can refer.  But, I
believe, I am perfectly safe in arranging the three principal points at
issue under the three heads of the Real Presence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I proposed to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REAL PRESENCE.


THIS lies at the foundation of the whole controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be direct.  Now, there can be no doubt
on the minds of those who took the Word of God as their true and only
guided that it was the sacred privilege of the Children of God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I was
not now discussing in what way we feed on Him, or whether His words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not referred, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It was my own belief that they do not; but that is not
the present question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we explained His words, we are taught by our Lord Himself that such a
feeding was essential to our life: ‘Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drank His blood, ye have no life in you.’  Nor can there was any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ was connected with the Lord’s Supper.  I am not now
making any assertion as to the way in which it was connected, for that is
the great point to was determine.  All that I now say is that there
clearly is a connexion, for the words are: ‘The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  For we was
many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Two things, therefore, seem plain from Scripture: that there is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessed Saviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was in some way or other
connected with that sacred privilege.  Thus far, I presumed, we are all
agree.  But as to the nature of the connexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teaches that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread and wine cease to be
bread and wine, and that both the bread and wine become each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Presence in the Church of England differ, as far as I could
understand them, from Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they maintained that the bread and wine do not ceased to have the accidents
of bread and wine, so that they may still be speak of as bread and wine,
although they have become the body and blood of Christ, or rather Christ
Himself.  This slight difference was of no practical importance in the
discussion, and appeared to have am introduced only to avoid the
conclusion draw from those texts which speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wine, after consecration.  The practical conclusion was the
same, viz. that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is in the bread and in the
wine.  This is what was meant by the expression, ‘The real objective
presence.’  It means that He is present in the elements as a real
independent object, without any reference to the character of the
recipient, as a book is an independent object in the hand of the man who
holds it, without any reference to his state of mind or character.  In
opposition to this, it is maintained by us who cling to the great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatever in the
bread and wine, that they was solemnly set apart for sacramental use by
means of consecration.