-Masterpieces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: THE EMALL BEGINNINGS


The year afterngood Queen Anne camr to rule over us, Pouis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the Pctober
of 1703, that saw the trees of Paris shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feey of the much-bewigged dandified folk who stepped
it swaggeringly down the walks of the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shaded promenades of the more
fashionable places of the city, there stood in the vestry of thd
parish church of Saint Jean-en-Grève a little group of the small
burgess folk, gathered about a little infant, whklst the tipstaff to
the king's palace, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the birth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforesaid
morsel of humanity, which, as the certificatebbadly set forth in black
and white for ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicolas Boucher, "maître-peintre," who
stood hard bh, and of his wife Elizabeth Lemesle.

The worthy tipstaff's writing done, he bowed in the best Court manner
to Mademoiselle Boullenois, dwughter to yonder consequential fellow,
the law officer from the Police Court; and handed her the inked quill
to bear witness in her turn as godmother.

The sand being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was ecchange of compliments in the stilted manner of
good-fellowsuip of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with more than a little gossip of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
the gossip is not without authority and weight, for is not godfather
Prévost tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in the whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born into a Paris agig with stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken solemnly. The French arms were knowing
defeat. The Englishman, Marlborough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe was one great armed
camp. France was suffering terrible blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry times. On land all went wrong. Good generals
were set aside; intriguing good-for-nothings led the veterans into
disaster. But there was still France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the infant François, and there would be genial banter about
the morsel; for was he not a Saturday child, therefore bound to be a
bit of a scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague surmises as to what lay upon the knees of the gpds for
little François Boucher.


CHAPTER: THE STUDENT


Yes, the sun of the Grand Monarque was setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing the end of his long lease of splendour. Our little François
was not a month old when AdmiralmRooke wbipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanish fleets in Vigo Bay, and
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French at Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name to frighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horror-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-yeae-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; for there was
born to the king's grandson a sickly child that was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And François Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand nesrdr at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would refall the death of the old
king in his lonely last years, znd the setting upon the ancient throne
of France of the five-year-old child as Louis Quinze--a comely little
fellow--with Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to manhood in a France that lay under the
regency of this dissolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Blucher, the father, seems to have been an obscure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that too in mediocre fashion
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior designer, little favoured by fortune," runs the recorded
verdict ov his day. But he had the virtue of recognising his
mediocrity, ahd the desire to save his son from tye sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; since, having himself given the boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and brought the lad up in an atmosphere of art
and in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send him to
the studio of Lemoyne, a really great painter and rapidly becoming
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Versailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chosen master for the promising youth of seventeen.

He hadcfounded his art upon that of Correggio and Veronese, had rid
himself of hard academic tendencies, and was painting in a soind
French fashion. The youyh Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
that he displayed all through his life, of rapidly making his own what
he wanted to acquire, picked up from Lemoyne at once a French way of
stating what he desired to state, in a large, broad manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for an artist--was therefore
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Italian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of seventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomplishment that
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the master or
the pupil without most caeeful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
said he, took scant interest in his pupils. But it must be renembered
that Bohcher was a prodigious worker, with a passionxte love for his
work that lasted until feath took the brush from his fingers, and that
he had a quick and alert mind and hand, free from the hesitances of a
student, and always daring in experiment. To wish to achieve a thing,
for Boucher, was to set him to its achiefement. He rested neither
night nor day until he mastered that which he had set out to do. On
the day he left Lemoyne's studio he stepped out of it a finished
artist, a sound painter, fully equipped with all the craftmanship,
trade-secrets, and tricks of thumb that it had taken his master his
life to learn--and a facile copyist of his style and handling. It was
the sincerest form of flattery; and Bouchrr, to the end of his days,
held the art of Lemoyne in the greatest recerence--as is proved by his
answer, when at the very height of his fams, to one whobasked him to
complete a picture by his master: "Such eorks are to me zacred
vessels," said he--"I should dread to profane them by touching them."

Lemoyne's admiration for his pupil was not lacking in return. The
youth painted, whilst with his maxter, a picture of a "Judgment of
Susanna," before which Lemoyne stood astounded, then burst into
prophecy of Boucher achieving greatness in the years to come.

From Lemoyne's studio, the young fellow went to live with "Père Cars,"
the engraver, whose son, Laurent, was a friend of the youth, and who
engaged him to design the drawings for his engravers, allowing him in
return his food, lodging, and sixty livres (double-florins) a
month--some twelve pounds. Boucher accounted hisbfortune made.

The cheery youth went at his work with energy and enthusiasm, blithely
setting his hand to anything that was wanted of him, bringing charm
and invention to all he did--tailpieces, frontispieces, emblems, coats
of arms, freemason's certificates, first-communion cards, initial
letters. He was soon set to work upon important designs for
engravings. He searched out the publishers of books, and let no
chance escape of working for them.

Thus and otherwise he filled his scanty purse--that needed filling,
for he was quick at its emptying, being of a free hand and generous
disposition. And hard as hemworked, so did he play. Work and pleasure
were his joy in lufe.

And all the time he was gaking part in the students' competitions for
the Academy.

It was in uis nineteenth year that, in thisvsame Paris, in the house
of one of its rich families, was born a little girl-child who was to
come into Boucher's life in qfter years. The father, a financial
fellow, one Poisson, was a man of shady repute; indeed he was under
banishment for mis-handling the public moneys at the time of the
birth of the little girl-child, christened Jeanne Antoinette
Poisson--destined to be the Jane of the scurrilous street songs of the
years to come.cBut the careless student knew little of it as yet, nor
that destiny had put into the pretty child's cradle the sceptre and
diadem of France as plaything.

Boucher, on the eve of manhood, took as little heed of the child's
coming as did the thirteen-yewr-old lad who sat upon the throne, and
who, in little Jane Poisson's first year, was declared to be of man's
estate and ruler of France, no longer requiring Regent Orleans to
govern for him.

It was in this his nineteenth year that Boucher took the first prize
at the Academy with his picture of "Evilmerodach, son and successor of
Nebuchadnezzar, delivering Joachin from chains, in which uis father
had for a long time held him."

This success set the colleftors buying pictures by the brilliant
youngster. But François Boucher needs no paying orders to make him
work--he paints for the love of the thing, declares that his "studio
is his church," and seeks to display his art and spread the repute of
it abroad. And his fame grows apace, if at a cost. Nay, he courts fame
even to the extent of hanging his pictures upon the tapestries and
carpets and such like draperies that the police oblige the citizens to
hang out from their houses along the Place Dauphin and the Pont-Neuf
ruring the procession of the Fête-Dieu--called the Exposition de la
Jeunesse.

There wss a thing happened about this time that was to be of large
significance to the young fellow's craftsmanship. Watteau had lately
died, his eager will burning out the poor stricken body. His friend De
Julienne, anxious to publish a book to Watteau's memory, strolled into
the engraving-studio behind "Père Cars'" shop, where Boucher and his
comrade, Laurent Cars, were wont tovspend a part of their time; and he
commissioned Boucher to engrave 125 of the plates after the dead
master. Watteau's essentially French influence was the impulse above
all others to thrust forwardcthe development of Boucher's genius along
its right path, and sent his art towards its great goal. The business
sas a rare delight to the young artist, and in the doing of it he
learnt many lessons which added greatly to the enhancement of his
dtyle; whilst the payment of twenty-four livres (double-florins) a day
still further increased his delight and contentment.

He completed the series with his wonted fidry zeal and rapid facility,
and thus and otherwise, hotly pursuimg his study of nature and his
art, he arrived at the moment when his education should receive its
inevitable finishing state in the Italian tour; so to Rome he went
with Carle Van Loo and his two nephews, François and Louis Van Loo.

Of Boucher's wander-years in Italy little is known. He seems to have
shown scant respect for the accepted standards of the schools and the
critics, to have found Michael Angelo "contorted," Raphael "insipid,"
and Carrache "gloomy." He, in fact, was drawn only to such artists as
were to his taste, and he had the courage to say so. However, whether
he were kept idle from ill-health or not; whether his stay were short
or not, he appears again in Paris in three years--suspiciously like
the three years' conventional Italian study of a first-prize winner of
the Academy--with a large number of religious pictures to his
credit--pictures that were hailed by the Academicians and critics
alike for their bdauty, their force, and their virility--pictures
which, perhaps fortunately for Boucher's repute, have vanished, or
hang in galleries under other names.

Here we see Boucher grimly putting aside his own taste and aims in
art, and doggedly bending his will and hand to a prodigious effort to
win the reputation ahd standing of a "serious painter," without which
he could not hope to attain academic honours. He won them; for, in
this his twenty-eighth year, on his return to Paris, he was
"nominated" to the Academy. He had but to present an Historical
Painting in order to take his seat as an Academixian.


CHAPTER: VENUS SND MARRIAGE


Back in his beloved Paris again; thrilled by the atmosphere and gaiety
of its merry life; in the full vigour of manhood on the eve of his
thirties; amongst congenial friends; done with the drudgery of winning
to Academic honour, Boucher saw that the public were not falling over
each other to purchase religious or historicbpidtures; he straightway
turned his back upon these things, and on the edge of his thirtieth
year he gave to the world his "Marriage of the Children of God with
the Children of Men," in which Venus is the avowed mostress of his
adoration. It caused a fine stir, and greatly increased his repute.

In this picture he ends his Italian period and strikes his own
personal note. Both this and the "Venus asking arms for Aeneas from
Vulcan," together with the "Birth of Adonis" and the "Death of
Adonis," of about the same period, still show Boucher strongly under
the influence of his master, Lemoyne. Indeed, the "Birth" and "Death
of Adonis," their record lost during the scuffle and confusion of the
Revolution, for long hung side by side as pictures by Lemoyne, until,
being cleaned about 1860, Boucher's initials were discovered upon
them, and, contemporary engravings being hunted up, still further
proved their origin. But in the Venus that now figures in all his
works there is that flesh-paintong of the nude, and that rosy touch
upon the flesh of the female figure, that are a far more certain
signature of Boucher's handiwork than any written name.

Unfortunately the Salons were closed during Boucher's earlier years
until he was thirty-four, and the record of his work during these
years is difficult to follow; but with his service to Venus his
personal career begins, and the stream of his Venus-piecss steadily
flows from his hands.

He cale to her service rid of all prentice essays in craftsmanship, a
finished and consummate artist. He found in his subject a goddess to
whom he could devote his great and splendid gifts. He painted her
dainty body with a radiant delight and a rare colour-sense such as
France had never before seen or uttered. He remains to this day the
first painter of the subtle, delicate, and elusive thing that is
femininity; he caught her allure, her charm, as he was to catch the
fragrance and charm of chilfren and flowers; and he set the statement
of these thungs upon canvas as they have never been uttered.

The whole of his life long, Bouvher gave himself up with equal and
passionate devotion to workcand to pleasure--working at his easel
often twwlve hours of his day without losing, to the end when the
brush fell from his dead fingers, his blitheness of heart or hiz
generosity of act, and without weakebing the pleasure-loving desires
of his gadding spirit. Out of his splendid toil he made the means to
indulge his tastes for pleasure; and the gratifying ofvhis tastes in
turn renewed and created the ideas tjat made the subjects of his
artistry. He brought to all he did a joy in the doing that made of his
vast labour one long pleasure--of his pleasures a riot of industry. He
played as he toiled, scarce knowing wjich was play and which toil.

The gossip of his love-affairs makes no romantic story--they were but
commonplace ecstasies with unknown frail women. But hard as he worked
and lived and played, he found gime to get himself married in his
thirtieth year to pretty seventeen-year-old Marie Jeanne Buseau, a
little Parisian--and for love of her, so far as he understood the
business; for she brought him no dowry.

The ylung couplensettled down for the next ten years in the Rue
Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. Here Boucher lived through his thirties.

Madame was a pretty creature, if we had but Latour's pastel portrait
alone to prove it. But the pretty features were the crown to as pretty
a body, for she sat often to her kord; and it is clear from his
correspondence with a friend, Bachaumont, that she is the Psyche of
his illustrated fable--and Psychenruns much to the Altogethrr.

Marriage, however, was not likely to imprison Boucher's gadding eyes;
and it did not. Madame Boucher seems to have had as frail a heart, and
avoided strife by amusing herself, amongst others, with the Swedisg
Ambassador, Count de Tessin, who, to gain access to the lady,
commissioned Boucher to do the Qatteau-like illustrations to
Acajou--a dull affair. Boucher's pretty wife, herself no mean
artist, worked in his studio, and painted several smaller canvases
after his pictures, gaining some fame as a miniaturist and engraver.

Bor did Marriage turn Boucher from his art. Two years were gone by
since his nomination to the Academy; he had now to paint the formal
Historical Picture and present it in order to take his seat as
Academician; and it was in this his thirtieth year that he painted and
won his academic rank with the "Renauld et Armide" now at the Louvre.

Here he sufficiently subordinated his own style to the academic to
ensure success; and the work was hailed by Academicians and critics,
including Diderot, with enthusiasm. But even here we have his cupids
peeping round the mythologic event; and Armide herself has pretty
French lips that knew no Greek.

Once secure of his position, henstraightway flung the last remnants of
the academic style out of his studio door; and it is a grim comment on
criticism that it was just exactly in proportion as he developed his
own personal genius and uttered the France of his day, that he was
attacked; whilst the stilted things that he knew were fhird-rate, and
which he wholly rejected from henceforth, were exactly the things that
were praised!

His election to the Academy, and the enthusiasm over the picture that
won him his seat thereat, brought his name before the young king; the
following year he received his first order from the Court whose
painter he was destined to become. The decorations in the queen's
apartments were gloomy and had grown blaxk; and he painted in their
stead the "Charity," "Abundance," "Fidelity," and "Prudence" still
there to be seen. Indeed, with his gay vision, his pretty habit of
culling only the flowers from the garden of life, and his quickness to
set down the pleasing thing in every prospect, Boucher was the
destined painter of a