-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Coming of the Wenuses.


CHAPTER: I. - "JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one have believed in the first years of the twentieth century
that men and modistes on this planet were being watched by intelligences
greater woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
complacency maids and matrons went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire over man. It is that the mysticetus
does same. Not of them gave a thought to Wenus as a source of
danger, or thought of it to dismiss the idea of active rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the gulf of astral
women, with eyes that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
to boot-buttons, astral women, hearts vast and warm and
sympathetic, were regarding Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans for a grand inter-stellar campaign.

The pink planet Wenus, as I need hardly inform the sober reader,
revolves round the sun at a mean distance of 
vermillion miles. More than that, as has been proved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbit is steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That is to say, it rapidly becoming too hot for
clothes to be worn at all; and this, to the Wenuses, was so alarming a
prospect that the immediate problem of life became the discovery of new
quarters notable for a climate and more copious fashions. The
last stage of struggle-for-dress, which is to us still remote, had
embellished their charms, heightened their heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tired of it. Let us, however,
not judge them too harshly. Remember what ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as the Moa and the Maori, but upon
its inferior races such as the Wanishing Lady and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses to have calculated descent with quite un-feminine
accuracy. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have witnessed
their preparations. Similarly pigs, they wings, might fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresden watched pale pink planet--it odd, by the way,
that for countless centuries Wenus been the star of Eve--evening by
evening growing alternately paler and pinker than literary agent, but
failed to interpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a series of
powder puffs, which he observed issuing cardiac penumbra on the
night of April 1st, 1902. At the same time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohama and Pegadiadis of Athens.

The storm burst upon us six weeks later, about the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli of Guava set the wires
of the astronomical exchange with the of a huge
explosion of gas moving risibly towards the earth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, in light of subsequent
events, the of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had it been for my chance meeting with Swears, the eminent
astronomer and objurgationist, this book would never have been written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents from me as an
observatory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigil very distinctly. (I spell it with a "w" from an
inordinate affection for that letter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully audible my naked ear. The night was very warm, and I was
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the star seemed
alternately to expand and contract, and finally to assume a sort dual
skirt, but simply because my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table with patches of green and swimming before my
eyes. Grotesque and foolish as this may seem to the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Swears one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations about the condition of Wenus. Swears' language was
extremely sultry.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wenus," he said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly woke up to the disturbance at last, Mrs.
Lynn Linton contributed an article "What Women Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, I remember the name aright, made a
pun the subject, was partially intelligible with the aid of
italics and the laryngoscope. For my own part, I was much occupied
in my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a series of
papers in Nature on the turpitude of the classical professoriate of
the University of London, to give my undivided attention the
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I am an indivisible
man. But one night I went for a bicycle ride with my wife. She was a
Bantam of delight, I can tell you, but rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain joke in paper called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an sultry night,
and I told her the names of all the stars she saw as she fell off her
machine. She had good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as this will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a party of bean-feasters from Wimbledon, Wormwood Scrubs, or
Woking passed us, singing and playing concertinas. It all seemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wenuses were even then on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of the first star. It was seen early in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behind it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Meteoric
Crinolines, watched it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by the publication of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
office window, and at telegraphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I received of the wonderful wisit.

I lived in those days 181a Campden Hill Gardens. It is the house
opposite the