-Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly that I have a reasonable thing of it, ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the facts,
and gave a description of the location—and not being on that continent,
he could not point out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, the first habitation man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others becoming impressed with the of its being
not possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden still in right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have the as been to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                        THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.” It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in region
where it was first be, and which caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and