-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than had when they were
in progress.  I come home from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied. It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must require (for everything
does) patience and some pains.  That are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people a few stock commonplace expressions of
the as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of the master or mistress looking your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assume to be hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study you, you think; it comes by nature to
you know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener friends than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which my own office from general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the race.

It was through glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a great aversion to that man moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our forms, and the clerk them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look. (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought a clergyman, but for his having Reverend
here,’ I.

‘Probably, his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here? Did say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who pictures and books, and first man
I saw