-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first dabbled in this art, the old distemper call'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp, and at last took up the now current appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' a learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hath written, divides the Spleen and
     Vapours, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, and the
     Hyppocons; but subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Fiacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinson, A New System of the Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--the seventeenth-century medical term for a
wide range of nervous diseases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasis in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as well as lay authors had been writing literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poems, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fashionable of English maladies under the variant names of
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nervous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it makes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
is indeed a "practical treatise" and because it offers the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had been put forth on the subject, as well as an explanation of the
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplace malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English literature
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypochondriasis. Their
concern is apparent in both the poetry and prose of two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagian exposition in The Anatomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smollett's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Bramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
the nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weeping heroines populate
the pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholy; so considerable in number are the works that could be placed
under this heading that it actually makes sense to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic survey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises written on the subject) would include mention of
Milton's "Il Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," the meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thinkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such as Richard Baxter, author of the Reliquiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted), Swift's "School of Spleen" in A Tale of a Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belinda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melancholic "I" of
Samuel Richardson's correspondence, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield and
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
contributed to the London Magazine, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" women as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So great in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moore has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this literature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailable practical
handbook on the subject by a prolific author all too little known.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenth century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypochondriasis signified a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chondria) and the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hypochondriasis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeenth
century at which time an innovation was made by Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
addition to showing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Sydenham noted
that the external cause of both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of the animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in pain, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset of the malady to mental phenomena and not to obstructions of the
spleen or viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theory of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence on the physicians
of the eighteenth century was profound: Cheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--here I merely note coincidence, not historical
cause and effect--the disease became increasingly fashionable in England,
particularly among the polite, the aristocratic, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scrub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen and Mrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that distemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, hypochondria was so
prevalent in people's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire poems like William Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto's (1731) and Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devoted to this strain; others, like
Malcom Flemyng's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), were more technical
and scientific. Professor Donald Davie has written that he has often
"heard old fashioned and provincial persons 
even in  own lifetime say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a pain in the neck'"; and I myself have heard
the expression, "You give me the pip," where "pip" may be a corruption
of "hyp." As used in the early eighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far from what our century has learned to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym for "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siris (1744), one of the tracts in the tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, they are all mad, or
Hypochondriac, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, the Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bees,
seems to have understood perfectly well that hypochondriasis is a
condition encompassing any number of diseases and not a specific


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AN EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pause to think that Tuesday, the twenty-third day of July,
nineteen hundred and one, not only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the history of the world.

That day placed a mile-stone on the road of civilization because it
saw the culmination of one of the greatest movements ever attempted in
behalf of common school education. It marked an epoch in the history
of the world because, for the first time within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battalions of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjection, sent a carefully selected body of men and
women to carry to them the benefits of a highly developed society.

It was on this day that the United States Government sent from San
Francisco four hundred and ninety-nine trained men and women to
establish throughout the Philippine Islands a system of free public
schools.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Building in San Francisco had just
fallen, announcing the hour of noon on the one hundred and twentieth
meridian, when the propellers began revolving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into the middle of the bay, where it
dropped anchor for a few moments while some belated boxes of lemons
and a few other articles were added to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchor was again on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
by four oarsmen with drawn muscles and clenched teeth glided in under
the bow of the ship. Its passenger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandered from the pier, was shouting for some one to throw
him a rope, and a few moments later our last passenger whose silvery
hair little indicated the probability of such a blunder was landed in
a heap on the deck. Our ship was now under way and soon passed out of
the Golden Gate bearing on and between her decks the largest number of
teachers as well as the largest cargo of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore to a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in the afternoon five whales came up
and spouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in the distance the sun sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alone.

By good fortune we went by way of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered the harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moon still shone with resplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind the
town. High points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billowy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveler who lands at Honolulu will feel unrequited for his time
and his money should he visit two places in the vicinity of the town.

The first is the Pali and the second, the Bishop Museum of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The first is a gigantic precipice, reached by a few hours ride from
the city by horse. As one reaches the precipice, there spreads out
before him at a dizzying depth below a verdant plain, bounded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
countries is gathered in between the long projecting arms of a
mountain chain and rushes over the face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travelers to be one of the strongest continual winds on
the globe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnology contains the finest
collection in existence of things illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of the Kanakas. There are royal documents to prove that more
than one thousand men have been beheaded before this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famous robe of birds' feathers, made to please
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
strange, but really elegant, robe is made are of a reddish color. The
birds from which they were plucked were found only in the Hawaiian
Islands and each bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinction of the bird is attributed to the making of this
royal robe. So many of them were needed that hundreds of hunters were
employed a score or more of years to secure the number required.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable figure, the value of
the robe is over three hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees also that famous sport of the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a long narrow board and then sits astride of it upon the surface
of the water. As the long billows come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Honolulu and