-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-headed little girl, nine years old, who played with
her dolls in the most interesting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hair and beautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played most of the time with her, and her charming
little husband, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away at
school and who was much too old to play with dolls any more, had given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Betsey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself the dolls’ mother, for they were all
grown up, and much older than she was already. And they seemed to need a
new chair or a new bed so very often, that a carpenter was necessary
most of the time. So whenever Mr. Delight wished to order new furniture,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exactly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needed new dresses or new curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Bettina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Betson, and talked gruffly with them about
tonics and pills.

She talked for each of the dolls, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a very skilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieces of furniture in the pictures that
she did not make all alone by herself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. And she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considering everything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her best lessons in
patience and neatness were learned in Play-time!


CHAPTER: -Found at Last: the Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that answers the Bible description of the notable spot better than anything yet discovered-


On the principle of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
very slow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied that I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventured
to publish it. It has appeared in brief articles in the Galesville
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in order to invite general inspection, and criticism.

When God made man to dwell on the face of the earth, He, evidently, must
place him somewhere. In giving the antldiluvians a description of the
creation, and first location of man, how mankind corrupted themselves, and
how God destroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the location—and it not being on that continent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and his family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that continent; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhere on earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and consequently the innocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been opening to the
minds of some, that the first habitation of man must have been somewhere
on the American Continent; and the finger of time has been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. But of this
last fact I was ignorant when I made the discovery of the garden, and
commenced developing the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on the
hanging garden and looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and counting the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is the garden of Eden: at which suggestion I smiled, as
the plat, to me then, was altogether too large. Of course I had never
given it thought, nor measured it up in my own mind to what should, or
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as a matter of pleasantry, used, occasionally to say to my
friends, This is the garden of Eden.

Since I commenced to publish my views, claiming a possible reality, while
some have mocked, others are becoming impressed with the idea of its being
not only possible, but highly probable. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimate, and from which to make man, as he now is, an
inhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not too far south. Our
garden is in that place. It should be destitute of money mineral wealth,
as these, if easily obtained, are corrupting in their tendencies, and
should be sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is still in the right place. From inherited wealth
and luxury comes danger to the inheritors. Our garden is again right. But
it should be a place susceptible of, and adapted to moral and intellectual
growth, and lead to the admiration, adoration, and worship of the great
Builder of the universe, the Infinite and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beautiful earth, than is our garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would like to see it.

I have related the facts as they have been presented to me, or as I have
discovered them, and believe the reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                                            THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to water the garden,——And from thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and importance, and which,
answers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is plain that Eden is a certain
country; that the Euphrates river crosses that country, that “eastward”,
or on the eastward, bank of, or at a certain point on that river, is
located the garden of Eden; and that three lesser rivers run through and
water this garden, flowing into the great river; thus four rivers run into
and water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, we have a clue; “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by streams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers cross our garden plain, into our
Euphrates. The names given to these rivers were, doubtless, explanations
of facts well known to the antideluvians.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admitted,
that, there is no such spot, or coming together of rivers in the region
where it was first supposed to be, and which has caused explorers and
researchers to turn to Africa, and other countries, in search of the
place; and Dr. Warren, with all his learning and ingenuity, to the North
Pole. But we have found it where he and others, can come and see for
themselves.

It is located on the “eastward bank” of the Mississippi River, between the
beautiful cities of La Crosse, Wisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beauty and euphony of those names. The Mississippi—the bible
Euphrates—river, being one of the longest and most picturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its tributaries, some of which reach
far out into “Havilah” the “Land of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains on the eastern border, 2,000 miles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and from the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north, across the United States into the
Bridtish possessions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
and habitable region of earth, and is being settled and


CHAPTER: Chapter I: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paused on her way past the playroom door, and listened. She knew
Betsey did not have company, and yet there was a sound of three
voices,—first a pleasant deep, bass voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
very softly and looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curly head propped up on
her hand. Before her stood the low, broad Morris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the back, on account of the
funny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’s very first piece of sewing. And nobody could possibly mistake
the dining-room in front, with its large red pasteboard table, and
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smiling as usual, ready to serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Delight barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing smells in the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of the creamed oysters?”

“And some of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behind the door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell you what I wish,” said Mr. Delight with a deep cough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
week with us.”

“Where in name hebben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delight. “This house is certainly a tight
fit for three, and with two extra ones!”

“I wish I could afford a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tone.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sit up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight around the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “I didn’t mean a word I said, William; I really didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Mother suspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
softly pulled the door together and tiptoed away to the telephone. She
smiled to herself as she called up the carpenter-shop.

“I want you to make my daughter Betsey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just like the one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
get it done for Betsey’s birthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint and all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expecting to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Your birthday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dear,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t like it,” said Father.

Now, whenever Father said that,—“I’m afraid she won’t like it,”—Betsey’s
present was sure to be very large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darling black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excitement, hurried
upstairs to the playroom and pushed open the door. And there it stood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and pale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, and the cunningest threshold!

Betsey rushed over to the dainty little cottage, put her head in the
little dining-room and looked through the double doors into the
drawing-room. “Just to see how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

And then her eyes fell on a square white card dangling from one of the
little window-sashes.

“THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT” said the card. “To Betsey, from Father and
Mother.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Betsey, tossing
back her curls and clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that child!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in the middle of the
room. “Mr. Delight has wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twinkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can simply make her bed,” agreed Mother.

So Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brass bed as smoothly
as she could (with a perfectly