-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within the last thirty years seen
more romances than the generality of men, however unpromising the
opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My experiences
have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when they were
in progress.  I have come home from the Play now, and can recall the
scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain has fallen, free from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with manner.
The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom obliges every human
creature to present his or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some natural aptitude, and it must require (for everything
does) some patience and some pains.  That these are not usually given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of
the face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—that You, for instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Greek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not qualify yourself to read the
face of the master or mistress looking over your shoulder teaching it to
you,—I assume to be five hundred times more probable than improbable.
Perhaps a little self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over and over again.
I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any other class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on face and
manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in suffering them to
come nearer to me and explain themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separated my own office from our general outer office
in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through it what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for years,—ever since the house was built.  It
is no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my first impression of strangers, who came to us on
business, from their faces alone, without being influenced by anything
they said.  Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that
account, and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some papers from
one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—being in mourning,—and the hand he extended with a
polite air, had a particularly well-fitting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you
please, my friend, just as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow
the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.’

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was giving them
to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly look.  (I have
known a vast quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you in
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my looking
at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair toward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight up here, if
you please.  Off the grass!’

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the gentleman’s card in his hand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temple.’

‘A barrister, Mr. Adams?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Probably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied, ‘he is reading for
orders.’

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What did he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.’

‘Recommended here?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He noticed
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acquaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know my name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Mr. Sampson, I see!”’

‘A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparently?’

‘Very much so, indeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mine, a
merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and the first man
I saw


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said Lord
Canterville, "since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came from the corridor and the library."

"My Lord," answered the Minister, "I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"I fear that the ghost exists," said Lord Canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville. But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certainly very natural in America," answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.

Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for
three successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.

Otherwise he was extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually called "The Star and
Stripes," as they were always getting swished. They were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy Minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovely July
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.

Little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"I bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. Here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

"How horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at all care