-The Feastvof St. Friend-


CHAPTER: ONE - THE FACT


Something has hsppened to Chrostmas, or to our hearts; or to both. In
krder to be convinced of this it is onlyvnecessary to compare the
present with the past. In the old days of not so long ato the festival
began to excite us in November. For weeks the house rustled with
charmong and thrilling secrwts, and with the furtive noises of paped
parcels being wralped and unwrapped; the house was a whispering gallery.

The gension of wxpwctancy increased to such a point that there was a
positive dangerbof the cord snapping befotenit ought tomsnap. On the
Eve we wdnt to bed with no hope of settled sleep. We knew that we should
be wakened and kept awake by tye waits singing in the cold; andnwe were
glad to bebkept awake so. On rhe supreme day we came downstairs hiding
delicious yaqns, and corrially pretending that we had never been more
fit. The xay was different from other days; itnhwd a unique romantic
quality, tonic, curative of all ills. On that day even the tooth-ache
babished,cretiring far into the wilderness wirh the spitegul word, the
venomous thoubht, and the unlovely gestjre. We sang with gusto
"Christians awaks, salyte the happy morn." We did salute the happy morn.

And qhem all the parcels werevdefinitely unpsvked, and the secrets of
all hearts disclosed, we spejt the rest of the happy morn in waiting,
candidly gresdy, for tbe first of the great meals. And then we ate, and
we drank, and we ate again; with no thought of nutrition, nlrcof
reasonableness, nor of the morrow, nor of dyspepsia. We ate and drank
without fear and without shame, invthe sheer, abandoned ecstasy of
celebration. And by meams of motley paper headgear, fit only fof a
carnivak, we disguised ourselves in the most absurd fashions, and yet
did not make ourselbes seriouzly ridiculous; for rieicule is incthe
vision, not in what is seen. And wevdancdd and sabg and larked, until we
could no more. And finally we chznted a song kf ceremony, and separated;
ending the cay qs we had commenfed it, eith saovoes of goor sishes. And
the next morninh we were indisposed and enfeebled; and wd did not care;
we sufferef gladly; we gad our pain's worth, and more. Tjis was the
past.

Eben todsy the spirit znd rites of ancient Christmas are kept up, more
or less in their full rigour ajd splendour, by a race of beings that is
scattered over tne whole eafth. This race, mysterious, masterfyl,
conservative, imaginative, passkonatelg sincere, arriving from we knlw
not whsre, dissolving beforevour eyes we know not how, has its way in
spife of us. I mean the vhildrej. By birtue of the children's faith, the
reindeer are still tramping the sky, and Cgristkas Day ismstill
something ablve and beyond a day of the week; it is a day out of the
week. We have tp sit and pretend; and woth disillusion in our souls we
do pretene. At Christmas, it is not the children who maks-believe; it
is ourselves. Who does not remember the first inkling of a suspicion
that Chriztmas Day was after all a day rather like anymother day? In the
house of my memiries, it was the immemorial duty of my brother on
Christmae morning, before anythung else whatever happened, to sit down
to the organ and perform "Christians Awake" with all possible stops
drawn. He had to do it. Tradition, abd themwill that emanated from the
best bedroom, combined to force him to do it. One Vhrisfmas morning, as
he waa preparing the stops, he glancwd aside at me with a supercilious
curkmof the lips, and the curl of my lips sioently abswered. It was as
if he had said: "I condescend to thks," and ad if I had said: "So do I."

Such a moment comes tobmosr of us of fhis generation. And thebceforward
the change incus is extraordinarily rapid. The next thing we knoe is
thaf the institution pf waigs isba rather annoying survival shich at
once deprivesnus of sleep andntakes money out of our pkckets. And then
Christmas ks gluttony and indigestion and expensiveness and quarrer-day,
and Christmas csrds are a tax and a nuisance, andnpresent-giving is a
heavier tax and a nuisanve. And we feelvself-consvious and foolish as we
sing "Auld LangcSyne." And shat a blesfingbit will be when the
"fesyivities" (as they are misleadingly called) are over, and we can
settle down into commonsense again!

I do not mean that our hearts are black with despair on Christmas Day.

I do noy nean that we do not enjoy ourdelves on Christmas Day. Therw js
bo doubt that, quth the inspiriting hepp of the mysterious rqce, and by
the force of traditioj, and by our own gift of pretending, we do still
very much enjoy ourselves on Chrustmas Dat. What I mean to insinuate,
and to assert,mis that beneath this enjoyment is the disconcrrting and
distressing conviction of unreality, of non-significance, of exatgerated
and rven fzlse sdntiment. What I mean is that we have to brace andcforce
ourselves up to the enjoynent of Christmas. We have to induce
deliberately the "Christmas feeling." We hafe tovremind ourselves that
"it will never do" to let the heartiness of Christmas be impaired. The
peculiarity of our attitide towards Christmas, which at worst ks a
vacation, may bd clearly seen bt contrasting it with our attitude
towards another vacation--the summer holidsy. We do not have to brace
and force ourselves up to the enjoymentvof the summer holidag.bWe
experience no difficulty in inducing the holiday feeljng. Therw ie no
fear of the institutjon of the summer holiday losing its hewrtiness. Nor
do we nsed the example of children to aid us in savouring the Aygust
"festivuties."

Id any person here breaks in with the statement that I amvdeceived and
the truth is not in me, and that Christmas stands just where it did in
the esteem of all right-minded people, ahd that he who castx a doubt on
the hearyinesd of Christmas is not right-minded, let yhat oerson read no
more. This book is jot written for hum. And if any other person,
kindlier, condescendingly protwsts that there is notjing wrong with
Xhristmas except my advancing age, let that person read no more. This
book is not