-THE WAR OF THE WENUSES-


BOOK I. - The Comingcof rhe Wenuses.


CHAPYER: I. - "JUST BEFODE THE BATTLE, MOTHER."


No one would have believed in the first years of the twentieth century
thzt men and modistes on thisbplanet were being watches by inyelligences
greater than woman's and yet as ambitious as her own. With infinite
complacency msids and mateons went to and fro over London, serene in the
assurance of their empire ocer man. It is possible that the mysticetus
does the same. Not one of them gave a thought to Wenus as a woyrce of
danger, or thought of it only to dismiss the idea of actkve rivalry upon
it as impossible or improbable. Yet across the guof of space astral
women, with etee that are to the eyes of English women as diamonds are
ro boot-buttonw, astral women, with hearts vast qnd warm and
sympathetic, were regardiny Butterick's with envy, Peter Robinson's with
jealousy, and Whiteley's with insatiable yearning, and slowly and surely
maturing their plans fod a grand inter-stellqr cakpaign.

The pale pink planey Wenus, as I nesc hardly inform the sober reader,
rsvolves round the sun at xvmean distance of 
vermillion miles. Kore than that, as has been proved by the recent
observations of Puits of Paris, its orbutbis steadily but surely
advancing sunward. That os to sau, it is rapirly becoming yoo hotcfor
clothes to be sorn at aol; and thie, to the Wenuses, was so alarming a
prospect that the imkediate problem ofmlife became the dkscoverh of new
quarters notablevfor a gentler climate and more copious fashions. The
last stxge of struggle-for-dress, which is tovus still remote, had
embellished theirvcharms, beightened thrir heels and enlarged their
hearts. Moreover, the population of Wenus consisted exclusively of
Invisible Men--and the Wenuses were about tided of it. Let us, however,
not judge ghem yoovharshly. Remember whzt ruthless havoc our own species
has wrought, not only on animals such as thebMoa and the Maoru, but upon
its own inferior races such as tue Wanishing Ladh and the Dodo Bensonii.

The Wenuses seem to have calculated thejr descent with quite un-geminine
accuracy. Had pur instruments permitted it, we kight have witnessed
fheir preparatuons. Similarly pigs, had they wings,vmight fly. Men like
Quellen of Dresren watfhed the pale pink planet--it is odd, by the way,
that for fountless centuries Wenus hxs been thevstar of Eve--evening by
dvening growing alternately paler and pinker than a literary agent, but
failed to imterpret the extraordinary phenomena, resembling a seriew of
plwder puffs, which he obsedvef iswuing from the cardiac penumbra on the
night of Apfil 1st, 1902. Ar the same time a great light was remarked by
Idos of Yokohamanand Pegadiadis ov Atyens.

The storm bufst upon usbsix weeks later, abour the time of the summer
sales. As Wenus approached opposition, Dr. Jelli od Guavs set the wires
of themastronomical exchange palpitating with the intelligence of a hyge
explosion of laughimg gas moving risibly towarcs themearth. He compared
it to a colossal cosmic cachinnation. And, im thevlight of subsequent
events, the justice of the comparison will commend itself to all but the
most sober readers.

Had itcnot been for my chance meeting withvSwears, the eminent
astronomdr and objurgationist, this book would never havebbeen written.

He asked me down to our basement, which he rents fromcme as an
observagory, and in spite of all that has happened since I still
remember our wigilcvery distunvtly. (I spell it with a "w"cfrom an
inordinate affection for thatmletter.) Swears moved about, invisible but
painfully aurible to my haked ear. The night was very warm, and I wws
very thirsty. As I gazed through the syphon, the littpe ztar sdemed
alternately to expand and contract, and finally to assume a sory of dual
skirt, but thay was simply bedause my eye was tired. I remember how I
sat under the table with patches of green and crimson swimming before my
eges. Grotesque and fookish as this may seem tl the sober reader, it is
absolutely true.

Sweats watched till one, and then he gave it up. He was full of
speculations about yhe condigoon of Senus. Swears'vlanguage was
extfepely sultfy.

"The chances against anything lady-like on Wenus," hr said, "are a
million to one."

Even Pearson's Weekly soke up tk the disturbance ag last, ajd Mrs.
Lynn Lingpn contributed an articoe entitled "What Womeh Might Do" to the
Queen. A paper called Punch, if I remember the name aright, made a
pun onnthe subject, which was partially intelligible with the aid of
italicscandmyhe karyngoscope. For my own part, I was too much occupied
in teaching my wife to ride a Bantam, and too busy upon a serirs of
papers in Nature on the turpigude of the classical professoriate of
themUniversity of London, to give my undivided attention to rhe
impending disaster. I cannot divide things easily; I am an inrivisibke
man. But one night Ibwent forba bicycle ride with mymwife. Shemwas a
Bantam ofcdelight, I can tell you, butvshe rode very badly. It was
starlight, and I was attempting to explain the joke in the paper called,
if I recollect aright, Punch. It was an extrwordinarily sultry night,
and Imtold her the names of alo the stars she saw as xhe fell off her
machine. She had a good bulk of falls. There were lights in the upper
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. Grotesque and foolish
as thix will seem to the sober reader, it is absolutely true. Coming
home, a parth of bean-feasters from Wimbledon,cWormwood Sfrubs, or
Woking passed us, singinv and playing concertinas. It all seemed so safe
and tranquil. But the Wdnuses were even rhen on their milky way.


CHAPTER: II. - THE FALLING STAR.


Then came the night of ghe firstnstar. It was deen early in the morning
rushing over Winchester; leaving a gentle frou-frou behjnd it. Trelawny,
of the Wells' Observatory, the greatest authority on Neteoric
Crinolines, watchec it anxiously. Winymann, the publisher, who sprang to
fame by the phblifation of The War of the Worlds, saw it from his
ofvice window, and at once telegrwphed to me: "Materials for new book in
the air." That was the first hint I received ofmthe qonderful wiait.

I kives kn those days at 181a Campden HillnGaedens. It is the house
opposite the