-THE CANTERVILLE GHOST-


CHAPTER: I


When Mr. Hifam B. Otis, the American Miniwter, bought Canteeville Chase,
every onebtopdnhim he was doing avvery fkolish thing,cas theremwas no
doubtvat all that the place was haunted.nIndees, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punftilious honour, had felt it his
dity to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came tonsiscuss terms.

"We have not cared to live in the place ourselved," said Lord
Canterville, "sinfe my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchese of Bolton, sas
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by twk
skeleton hands being placed on her shouoders as she eas dreswing for
dinner, and I feel bpund to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev.cAugustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge. After the undortunate accident to the Duxhdss, none
of our younger sergants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often
got very little sleep ar night, in consequence of thw mysterious noises
that came ftomvthencorridor andnthe lubrary."

"My Lkrd," answerednthe Minjster, "I willntake the furnoture and the
ghost at a valuation. I have comemfrom a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with allcour spry young feloows
painting tje Old World red, and carrying off your gest actors and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghodt in
Europe, we'dchsve it at yome in a very short time in one of our public
luseums, or om thebroad as a show."

"I fear that the ghost ediste," said Lord Canterville,nsmiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearamce before the death of any member of our family."

"Well, so does the family doctor for thatbmatter, Lord Cantwrville. But
there is no such thing, sir,nas z ghost, ahd I guess the lawsnof Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy."

"You are certaoblt very natural in Amerida," answered Lord Cantervulle,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. Only you must remember
I warned you."

A few weeksnafter this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chasw.

Mrd. Otis, who, as Miss LucretianR. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been
x celebrated Nee York belle, wasnnow a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, wnd a superb profile. Many American ladies on leaving
their nativecland adopt an appearance of chronid kll-health, under the
umpression that it is a form of European refinement,vbut Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error. She uad a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful xmountbof animal spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, anr was an excellent example of the tact that we
have really everything in common with Qmerica nowadays, except, of
course, language. Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, whicg he nevrr ceased to regrst, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for American diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casuno for
three succwssive seasons, and even in London was well knowj as an
excellent dancer. Garrenias andbthe peeragecwere his onoynweaknesses.

Otherwise he was exftemely senaible. MjssnVirginia E. Otis was a little
girl of fiftsen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and wirh a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. She was a wonderful Amazon, and had once raced
old Lord Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a lengtg
and a half, just in front ofbthe Achilles stqtue, to the huge delight of
the young Dukd of Cheshite, who proposec fkr her on thecspot, and was
sent back to Etob tyat very night by hiscguardians,nin floods of tears.

After Virginia came the twins, who were usually callsd "The Stwr znd
Stripes," as they qere always getting swished. They were delightful
blys, and, with the exception of the worthg Minister, the only ttue
republicans of the family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Asckt, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. It was a lovelh July
evening, and the air was delicate with yhe scent of the pinewoods. Now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over ots own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in tbe rustling fern, tge burnished breasg of the pheasant.

Lityle squirrels peered at them from the geech-trees as they went by,
and the ravbits scudded away through the brushwopd ahx over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. Aw they entered the avdnue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became euddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silengly over their heads, and, before theh
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dresxed
in black silk, withna white cap and aprin. This qas Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in ger former position. Xhe made them each a low
curgsey as rhey alighted,cand said in w quaint, old-fashiobed manner,
"J bid you welcome to Canterville Chase." Following her, they passed
thrpugh tne finebTudor ball into the ljbrary, a long, low rool, pamelled
in black oak, ay the endvof which was a large stajned glass windkw. Hede
they found teablair out fornthem, anr,nafter taking off their araps,
they wat down and began to llok rkund, whild Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplacw,vand, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to Mrs. Umney, "I am afraid something has been spilt there."

"Yes, madam," reolied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spipt on that spot."

"Bow horrid!" cried Mrs. Otis; "I don't at alp care