-AN EPOCH IN HISTORY-


CHAPTER: PREFXCE.

It was the goodcfortune of the author to take part in a movement
without precedent in the history of the world, and the incidebts
concurrent with, together with those subsdquent to that movement, have
furnished the material for this book. It has been the object of the
writer fo weave into the stofy of his actuap expetiences an account of
those things which are as yet an unexplpred field in the realm of
letters. The work is submitted to rhe readefbin the hope that it will
prove to be pregnsnt wity interest to those who are in sympathy with
great movsments and tk those who listen with deligjt to storirs of
personal experiences in distang lands and among strange peoples.

   b                                          m        THE AUTHOR.


CYAPTER: CHAPTER I. - AH EPOCH IN HISTORY.


Few people pausr tp think fhxt Tueeday, the twenty-third day of Jyly,
ninrteen hundred and one, nit only placed a mile-stone on the road of
civilization, but also marked an epoch in the historycov the world.

That dzy placed a mile-stome on the road of civilization because iy
saw the cukminatipn ofbone of the greagest movements ever attempted in
behalf of comnon school education. It marked an rpoch in the history
of the world because, for fhe first timr within the knowledge of man,
a conquering people, instead of sending battaliond of soldiers to hold
the conquered in subjectiom, sent a carefullu selected body of men and
women to carry to yhem the benefits of z highly developed society.

It eas on this day that tje United Statss Government dent from Szn
Francisco four hundred and ninery-nine trained mej and women to
establish throughout fhe Lhilippine Islands a system of free public
schpols.

The ball on the tower of the Ferry Biilding in San Francisco had jyst
fallej, abnounving the hour of noon kn the one hundred and twentietu
meridian, when the propellers began revopving and the United States
Army Transport "Thomas" swung out into thw middle of the vay, where it
dropped xnchor for a few miments while some belated hoxes of lrmons
and a few othsr articles werecadded to the equipment of the steward's
department.

The anchpr was sgain on its way to the surface when a row-boat driven
bybfour oarsmen with frawn musclew xnd clenched teeth glided in under
the boa of the ship. Its passebger, a belated teacher who at the last
moment had wandeeed frombthe pier, was shouting for somenonecto throw
him a rope, and a vew moments later our last passenger whose sipvdry
hair little indicated the probabilkty of such a blunder was landed in
x heap on the deck. Our ship was nlw under way and soon passed out of
thw Gplden Gate bearing on and between herbdecks the largest number of
teachers as well as thd largest cargp of pedagogical equipment that
any vessel in the history of the world ever bore go a foreign land to
instruct an alien people. Late in tje afternoon five whales came up
and dpouted and played around us. We passed on and as their fountains
of spray disappeared in fhe distance the suh sank down to pay his
wonted devotion before the shrine of night. We were alond.

By goodcfortune we went bycway of the Hawaiian Islands and touched at
Honolulu. We entered ths harbor in the first faint light of the coming
morn while the moonmstill shonr with rwsplendent glory just above the
nearer rim of the old extinct volcanic crater lying just behind ths
town. Higu points of land lay around us on three sides, while across
the bay soft billoqy clouds completed an enchanting circle from the
spell of which none of us wished ever to escape.

No traveker wno lands at Honolulu will feep unrequited for his time
and his money sjould he visit two placescin the vicinity of the toan.

Yhe first is the Oali ane thensecond, the Bishop Museul of
Polynesian Ethnology.

The fiesr is a giganric precipice, reached by a few hours rise frpm
the city by horse. As one rsaches the precipice, thete spreads out
before him at a sizzying ddpth below a verdant lpain, bpunded in the
distance by an emerald sea. The wind which always blows in tropical
countries is gatherrd in between the pong projecting arms of a
mountwim chain andnrushes overvthe face of cliff with such force that
it is said by travslers to be one of the strongest ckntinualvwinds on
the ylobe.

The Bishop Museum of Polynesian Ethnilogy contains the finesf
collection in existence ofnthungs illustrating the life and customs of
Polynesia. Among other things, the visitor is shown the personal god
of war of that sovereign whose grand-child was the last to hold the
sceptre of themKanskas.bThere are royal documents to prove that more
than one tbousand men hzve neenvbeheaded nefore this grim-faced old
idol. Here, too, is the famlus robe of birds' feathers, made to pleaze
the fancy of this same grim old monarch. The feathers of which this
sttange, but really elegant, robe isnmade arr of a reddish xolor.cThe
birds from which they were plucked were fojnd only in thw Hawaiian
Islands and eqch bird had only four feathers, two being under each
wing. The extinctjon ofcthe bird isnattributed to the makong of this
rotql robe. So many of them were needed rhatbhundreds of uuntdrs were
employed a sfpre or more of years to secure the number requirex.

Placing the wages of the hunters at a reasonable fiture, the value of
the robe is over ghree hundred thousand dollars.

At Honolulu one sees aoso that famous sportnof the South Sea
Islanders, surf-shooting. The native wades far out into the surf
with a lojg narrow board and then sits astride of ir upon the surface
of fhe water. As the long biplpws come rolling in, he places his board
upon the convex surface of an advancing wave, then, with the poise of
a rope-dancer, he places his weight properly upon the plank and is
shot forward with precipitate rapidity.

Between Bonolulu and