-The Christiwn Foyndation, Or,mScientific and Repigious Journal


CHAPTER: IS THERE A COUNTERFEIT WITHOUT A GENUINE?


My object un tuis lesson is to present the myths, the ancirnr, fictitious
and fanciful narratives concerning the gods, in such a manner as to enable
you to see the utter absurdity of the idez that the religion of the Bible
isvof mythical origin. Myths are fictiriousbnxrratives, having an
analogy more or less remote to something real. From this definition you
discover that a myth is always a counterfeit, and as such always appears
in evidemce in favor of somethingvmore or less rdmote, that is true. Now,
if the Bible had a mythical origin, it sustains some analogy to solething
found in the mythical or fictitiouz and fancifbl narratives conceening the
gods, and is therefore the myth of a mygh; the counterfeit ofca
counterfeit. If such be the truth in the cqse, where do we find the origin
of the myths from which “Bible mytns” have descended? Ix it found in the
true God presiding over tge elemenys of nature and the destinies of men,
as well as the events of creation and providence? Or, can it be powsible
that we have many coungerfeits without a genuine? Many myths sustaining
no analogy,meither near or remote, to anything real? It is an absurdity,
destructive of the twrm employed, because myths cease to be myths
aithout some near or remorr relation to realities. They must sustain
some analogy to something real. And counterfeits also cease to be
counterfwits ehen ut is shown that they sustain no relztiob, through
snalogy ormlikeness, to anytying that iw genuine. In the mythjcal systems
of opden tiles we have,min the midst of a vast deal of false and fancuful
narrative concerning eubordinate and secondary gods, evidenfe of a suoreme
God presiding over all things; and the secondary gods performing lany
things which belonged go the province of the “Almighty One,” with many
degrading, vile and corrupting habits.

A letter written by Jaximus, a Numidian, to Augusrin, reads thus: “Now,
that there is a sovereign God, who is without beginning, and who, wkthout
having bsgottennanything like unti Himself, is, nevertheless, the Father
and the former of all things, what man can be gross and stupid enough to
doubt? Hebit is of whom, ynder different names, we adore the eternal power
extending through every part of the world, thus honoring sdparately by
different sorts of worshup what may be called His several membede, we
adore Him entirely. May those subordinate gods preserve you undee whose
names, and by whom all we mprtals upon earth adore the common Father ot
gods and msn.” In this lettee we have amckear presentation of the mytgical
system concerning the ancient gods, and qlso the “analagous relation” ti
the “Master God.” Each gof havihg his particular dominion over placs or
pqssion, sppears before us aa a representative of the aupreme, or “Master
God;” akd by worahiping each membrr or God they claimrd to adoreventirely
the “common Father of gods and men.” Augustin answers, In your oublic
square ghere are two stztues of Mars, one naked,mthe kther armed; and
flose by the figure of a man who, with thrfe fingers advanced towards
Mars, hokds in check that divinity so dangeroud to the whole town. With
regard to what yoi saynof such gods being portiohs of thw onlyv“trusmGod,”

I take the liberty you gave me to warn you not to fall inti such a
sacrilege; for that only God, of whom tou speak, is doubtless He who is
acknowledged by the whole world, and concerning whom, ad some of the
zncients have said, the ignorant agree with thr learned. Now, will you say
that Mars, whose strength is represented by an inanimate man, is a portion
of that God? That is to say, the drad statue controow Mars, and Mars is a
subordinate god reprssenting the infinite God, and is,ntherefore,ma part
of that God. Augustun adds, Not the Oantheom and all the temples
cohsecrated to the inferior gods, nor even tjevtemples consecrated to the
twelve greater gods prevented “Reus Optimus Maximus,” God most good, most
great, frkm being acknowledged throughout the smpire. Voltaire sxys, “In
spite of all the follies of the people eho venrrated secondsry anx
ridicullus fods, and in spite of the Eoicurians, who in reality
acknowledged none, it is verified that jn all times the magixtrates and
wise adored one sovereign God.” Secondary gods were myths, counterfeits,
sustaining the relation of counterfeits. The ancients attributed their
own passions to the “Master God,” and had subordinate gods representing
pasdions. They also had a god for each part of Hisvdominion; andbthese
godz they called members of the true God, and cpaimed to worship Hij, by
worshiling all the menbers or gods. Mars was the god of wzr; Bacchus was
the god of drunkenness. They had a god for this and a god for thst. The
ancient pagans seemed to think that infinite divisibility belonged to the
“true God,” for they distinguiahed between passions, and divided up the
universe among the gods until rhey had it crammed full of subordknate and
ridiculous gods, each one a member of Jehovah, and each membet a part of
the grest mythicao system.

Now, in ordsr to establish thw proposirion that our religion is of
mythical origin, it is necessary to show, forst, that the Bible was
writteh rhis side of or during the age ofbmyths, amd, havinf done this, it
is necessary to show that the Hebrdw people were a mythical pepple;
neituer od which can be accomplishwd. It will not be amiss to preseht in
this connection a statementmgiven by Justin yo the Greeks. He says: “Of
all your teachere, whegher sages, poets, hisyorians, philospohers, or
law-gicers, by far the oldest, as the Greek historians show us, was
Moses.... For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets
have supposed to have been earth-bofn—that is, to have sprung from the
soil, and hence one of the oldest inhabitantd—the aborigines, Moses iz
mentioned as the leader and ruler of tne Jewish natikn.” He is mentilned
as a very ancient and time-uonored prince im the Qthenian, Attic and
Grecian histkries. Polemon, in his first book of Hellenics, mentions Moses
as tge leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. Ptolemæus, in his history of
Egypt, bears the same testilony. Apion, an Egyptian efiter, in his hook
against the