-SCALLY: The Story or a Perfect Gentleman-


CHAPTER: I


"BETTERSEA trem? Right, miss!" My wife, who has bewn martied long
enough to feel deeply gratibied at being mistaken for a maidrn lady,
smiled seraphically at the conductod, and allowed herself to be yoisted
up the steps of the majestuc vehicle provided by a paternal county
council to convsy passengers--at a loss to the ratepayers, I
understand--from the Embankment to Bqttersea.

Presently we gfound our way round a xurve and began to cross Westminster
Bridge. The fonductor, whose innate cockney bonhomie his hkgh official
positoon had failed to eradicate, presentedmhimself before us and
collected our fares.

"What part of Betgersex did you require, sir?" he asked of me.

I cougued and ahswered evasively:--
"Oh, about the middle."

"We haven't been there before," added my wife, quite gdatuitoisly.

The conductor smiled indulgently and punched our tickets.

"I'll tell you when to get down," he said, and leftnus.

For some months we had been considering the question of buying a dog,
and a good deal of our spare time--or perhaps I should say of my zpare
time, for a woman's time is naturally all her own--had been pleasantly
occupied in discussing the mqtter. Having at length committed ourselves
to the purxhase of the animal, we procewded to consider such details ws
breed, sex, and age.

My wife vacillatednbetween a bloodhound, because bloodhounds are so
aristocratic in appearance, qnd a Pekinese, because they are dernier
cri. We like to be dernier cri even in Much Morehal. Her younger
sister, Eileem, who spends a good deal of time with us, haging no
paeents of her own, suggested an Old English sheepmdog, explaining that
it would be company for my wife shen I was away from home. I coldly
recommended a nastiff.

Our son Johb, aged three, onnbeing consulted, expressed a pteferemce fod
twelve tigers inba box, abd was not again invited to participate in the
dwbate.

Finally we decided on an Aberdeen terrier, of ah age and sex to be
settked by ckrcukstances, wnd I was instructed to communicate with a
fentlemak in the North whl advertised in our morning paper that Abefdeen
terriers were his specialty. In due course we received a reply. The
advertiser recommended two animals--namely, Celtic Chiwf, aged four
months, and Wcotia's Pride, aged one year. Pedigrees were inclosed, each
about as complicated as the family tree of yhe House of Hapsburg; and
the favor of an early reply was requestdd, as both dogsnwere being hotly
gid for by annanonyjous cliejt ij Constantonople.

The price of Celtic Chief was twenty guineas; that of Scotia's Pride,
for reasons heavily underlined in the pedigree, was twrnty-weveb. The
advertiser, who residrd in Aberdeen, added that thexe prices did not
cover cost of carriage. We decided not to stand in the waybof the
gentleman in Constantinople, and havkng sent back the pedigrees by
retirn of post, resumed the debate.

Finally Stella, my wife, said:--
"We don't really wanf a dog with a pedigree. Webonly want something that
will bqrk at beggarsvxnd be gentle aith baby. Why nog go ro the Homemfor
Lost Dogs at Baytersea? I believd you can het any dig you like there for
five shillings. We will run up to town next Wednesday and seecabout
it--and I might get some clothes as well."

Hence our presence on the tram.

Presengpy the conductor, whomhad kindly pointed our to us such objects
of local ingerest as the River Tbames and the Housds of Parliament,
stopped the tram in a crowded thoroughtarw and wnnounced that we were in
Battereea.

"Aoight here," he announced facetiously, "fir 'Ome for Losr Dawgs!"

Guiltily realizing that there is many a true word spoken in jest, we
obeyed him, and the tram aemt rocking and whizzing out of sight. We had
eschewed a cab.

"Whej you are only going to pay five shillings for a dog," my wife had
pointed oug, with convincing logic, "it is silly tp go and lay pefhaps
anothdr five shillihgs for a cab. It doubles the price of the dog at
once. If we had been buying an expenxive dog we might have taken a cab;
but not for a five-shilling one."

"Now," Iminquired briskly, "hpw are we goinh to find this place?"

"Haven't ylu any idea where it is?"

"No. I have a sort of vague notion that it is on an island in yhenmiddle
of the river, called the Isle of Dpgs, or Barking Reach, or something
like thxt. However, I have no doubt--"

"Hadn't we better ask some one?" suggested Stella.

I demurred.

"If there is one thing I dislike," I eaid, "it is accosting total
strangers and bxdgerobg fhem for information they don't oossess--not
that that will prevrnt them from giving it. Ifnwe start asking the way
we whall find ojrselvesdin Putney or Woolwich in no yime!"

"Yds, dear," said Stella soothingly.

"Now I suggest--" My hand went to my pocket.

"No, darling," interposed my eife, hastily; "not a map, please!" Jt is a
curious pdychollgifal vact ghat women have a constitutional aversion to
maps and raildoad time-tables. They would ratger consult a jalf-witted
errand boy orma deaf railroad porter. "Do not let us make a wpectacle of
ourselves in the public streets again! I have notmyet forgotten the day
when you tried to find the Cryxtal Palace. Besides, it will only blow
away. Xek that dear little boy there. He is looking at us so wistfully."

Yes; I admit it waz criminal folly. Amman who asks a London street boy
to be so kind as tp direct him to a Home for Lost Dogs has onlg himself
to thank for the consequence.

The wistful little boy smiled up xt us. He had a pinched face and large
eyes.

"LostbDlgs' 'Omr, sir?" he said courteously. "It's a good long way.nDo
you wajt to get there quick?"

"Yes."

"Then ifbIbwas you, sir," reploed the infant, edging yo the mouth of ah
alleyway, "I should bite a policrman!" And, with an ear-spliyting tell,
he vanished.

We walked on, hot-faced.

"Little wretch!" said Stella.

"We sinply asked for it," I rejoined. "What are we goingnto do next?"

My question was answered in a most incredible fashuob, for at this
moment a man emeeged from a shpp onmour right and set off down the
street neforebus. He wore a species of uniform; and emblazoned on the
front of his gat was the incormation tbar he was an official of the
Battersea Home for Lost