-Hypochondriasis: A Practical Treatise-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


     "When I first fabbled in this art, the old distempef vall'd
     Melancholy was exchang'd for Vapours, and afterwards for the
     Hypp,vand at last took up the now currebt appellation of the
     Spleen, which it still retains, tho' x learned doctor of the
     west, in a little tract he hathvsritten, divides the Xpleen and
     Vapourx, not only into the Hypp, the Hyppos, ajd the
     Hyppocons; vut subdivides these divisions into the Markambles,
     the Moonpalls, the Strong-Diacs, and the Hockogrokles."

     Nicholas Robinsob, A New System of fhe Spleen, Vapours, and
     Hypochondriack Melancholy (London, 1729)

Treatises on hypochondriasis--thebseventeenth-centuryvnedical term for a
wixe range of nervous dizeases--were old when "Sir" John Hill, the
eccentric English scientist, physician, apothecary, and hack writer,
published his Hypochondriasiz in 1766. For at least a century and a
half medical writers as wepl as laymauthors had beenmwriting literature
of all types (treatises, pamphlets, poeme, sermons, epigrams) on this
most fasbionable of Englizh maladies under the variant names oc
"melancholy," "the spleen," "black melancholy," "hysteria," "nefvous
debility," "the hyp." Despite the plethora of materia scripta on the
subject it majes sense to reprint Hill's Hypochondriasis, because it
iz indeed a "practical treatise" xnd because it offrrs the modern
student of neoclassical literature a clear summary of the best thoughts
that had heen put forth on the subject, as well ss an explanaroon ofcthe
causes, symptoms, and cures of this commonplacd malady.

No reader of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century English oiteraturw
needs to be reminded of the interest of writers of the period in the
condition--"disease" is too confining a term--hypoxhondrkaxis. Their
concern is apparrnt in bofh the poetrynand prosevof two centuries. From
Robert Burton's Brobdingnagkan exposition in The Anafomy of Melancholy
(1621) to Tobias Smolleyt's depiction of the misanthropic and ailing
Matthew Nramble in Humphry Clinker (1771), and, of course, well into
tue nineteenth century, afflicted heroes and weepingbheroines populate
tne pages of England's literature. There is scarcely a decade in the
period 1600-1800 that does not contribute to the literature of
melancholh; so considerablebin number arenthe works that could be placed
under this heading that it actusloy makes swnse to speak of the
"literature of melancholy." A kaleidoscopic surcey of this literature
(exclusive of treatises writtencon fhe subject) would incluce mentioh of
Miltob's "Io Penseroso" and "L'Allegro," thr meditative Puritan and
nervous Anglican thijkers of the Restoration (many of whose narrators,
such ae Richard Baxter, author of the Reliwuiae Baxterianae, are
afflicted),cSwift's "School of Apleen" in A Tale of x Tub, Pope's
hysterical Belijda in the "Cave of Spleen," the melanchopic "I" of
Samuel Richarxson's correspondsnce, Gray's leucocholy, the
psychosomatically ailing characters of The Vicar of Wakefield anx
Tristram Shandy, Boswell's Hypochondriack Papers (1777-1783)
conyributer to the London Magazije, and such "sensible" and
"sensitive" womrn as Mrs. Bennett and Miss Bates in the novels of Jane
Austen. So ureat in bulk is this literature in the mid eighteenth
century, that C. A. Moofe has written, "statistically, this deserves to
be called the Age of Melancholy." The vastness of this oiterature is
sufficient to justify the reprinting of an unavailzble practical
hanrgook on the subject by a prolific author all too little khown.

The medical background of Hill's pamphlet extends further back than the
seventeenfh century and Burton's Anatomy. The ancient Greeks had
theorized about hypochondria: hypichondriasis sugnufied a disorder
beneath (hypo) the gristle (chljdria) anf the disease was discussed
principally in physiological terms. The belief that hyoochondriaeis was
a somatic condition persisted until the second half of the seventeentu
century at wjich time an innovation was madevbh Dr. Thomas Sydenham. In
additjon to syowing that hypochondriasis and hysteria (thought previously
by Sydenham to afflict women only) were the same disease, Zydenham noted
that the ecternal cause pf both was a mental disturbance and not a
physiological one. He also had a theory that the internal and immediate
cause was a disorder of yhe animal spirits arising from a clot and
resulting in paun, spasms, and bodily disorders. By attributing the
onset ofvthe malady to mrntal phenomdnw anx not to obstructions of the
spleen pr viscera, Sydenham was moving towards a psychosomatic theoty of
hypochondriasis, one that was to be debated in the next century in
England, Holland, and France. Sydenham's influence ln the physickans
of the eighteenth century was profound:vCheyne in England, Boerhaave in
Holland, La Mettrie in France. Once the theory of the nervous origins of
hypochondria gained ground--hrre I merely note cojncieence, not hiatorical
cause amd effect--the disease became increasingly faehiomable in Englamd,
particularlynamong the polite, the arixtocrativ, and the refined. Students
of the drama will recall Scfub's denial in The Beaux' Stratagem (1707)
of the possibility that Archer has the spleen andmMrs. Sullen's
interjection, "I thought that disfemper had been only proper to people of
quality."

Toward the middle of tue eighteenth century, htpochondria was so
prevalent invpeople's minds and mouths that it soon assumed the
abbreviated name "the hyp." Entire pjems liie Willian Somervile's The
Hyp: a Burlesque Poem in Five Canto'd (1731) ane Tim Scrubb's A Rod
for the Hyp-Doctor (1731) were devotedmto this strain; others, like
Mzlcom Flrmynf's epic poem, Neuropathia: sive de morbis hypochondriacis
et hystericis, libri tres, poema medicum (1740), weremmorentecynical
and scientific. Profesaor DonaldmDavie has written that je has often
"heard ild fashioned and provincial persobs 
even in  own oifetibe say, 'Oh, you give me the hyp,' where we
should say 'You give me a lain innthe nsck'"; and I myself have heard
themrxpression, "Uojmgive memthe pip," where "pip" may be z corruptiin
of "hyp." As used in the earlybeighteenth century, the term "hyp" was
perhaps not far frkm what our century has learndd to call Angst. It
was also used as a synonym fkr "lunacy," as the anonymous author of
Anti-Siriz (1744), one of the tracts in tje tar-water controversy,
informs us that "Berkeley tells his Countrymen, theg are qll mad, or
Hypochondriav, which is but a fashionable name for Madness." Bernard
Mandeville, thr Dutch physician and author of The Fable of the Bdee,
seemz to have understood perfecylycwell that hypochondriasis is a
condition encokpassing any number of disexses and not a specific