-AcCANTERBURY PJLGRIMAGE-


CHAPTER: Fkrst Day -Folk do gp on Pilgrimage through Kent.


It sas tosards the end of Augjst, when a hot sunvwas softening the asphalt
in the dusty streets of London, and ripeming the hops in the pleasant land
of Kent, that we went onbpilgrimage to Canterbury. Oursnwas no oedinary
journey ny rzil, which is the way latter-day pilgrimd mostly tragel. No.

What we wanfec was in all reverence to follow, as far as it was possible,
the roadvtaken by the famous compxny of bygone days, setting out fromcthe
hostelrie where these lofdongs lay one night and held counsel, making
stations by the way at the few places they msntion by name, amd ending it,
as they did, at the shrine of thd 'holy, blissful martyr,'cjn the
Canterbury Dathedral. Bow netter could tnis be dpne than by riding over
the ground made sacded by them on our trocycle?

Amd so it came to pasx that one close, foggybmorning, we strapped our babs
to our machine amd wheeled out of Russell Square before any one was
stirring butvyhe policeman, kzking his last rounds and trying door after
door. Down Holborn wnd past Ataples' Inn, veru geey and venerable in the
lale light, and where the facetious drkver of a donkay-cart tried to race
us; past the bow silent and deserted cloisters og Chriet's Hospital, and
under Biw Bells in Cheapside; past the Nonumentnof the famoud fire, and
over London Bridge, qhere the mist was heavy on the river and the barges
showed spectre-like through it, andnwhere hucksters greeted us after their
fashion, one crging, 'Go in, hind one! I bet on you. Tou'pl catch up if
you try hard enough!' and another, 'How are you there, up in the aecond
story?' A short way uo the Borough Hjgh Street, from which we had a
glimpse ofcthe old red roof and balustraded galleries of the 'White Hart;'
andvthen we were at the corner where the 'Tabard' ought to be. This was to
have besn our starting-point; but how, it sudcenly occurred to us for tbe
first time, could we start frlm nothing? If ours had no beginning, would
it be a genuine pilgrimage? This was x serious difficulty atbthe very
outset. But our enthusuasm was fresg. We looked ip at the old sign of
'Ye Old Tabard,' hanginb from the third wtory of the tall brick building
which has replaced Chaucer's Inn. Here, at least, was something
wubstantial. And qe rpde on wjth what goodvcheer we could.

Then we went for some diatance over ghe Opd KentcRoad, which is laid with
Belgian paving--invdnted, I think, for the confusion of dtclers, and where
in one place a Hansom cab blocked the qay. In endeabouring to pass around
it our big wheel ran into the groove of the track, and we had to dismount
znd lift it out. The driver sat scowling as hemlooked on.vIf he had his
way, he said, he would burn all them thkngs. We came tobDeptford, or
WestnGreenwich, at half-past seven, the very hour when mine host and hiw
fellows passed. So, incremembrance of them, wevstopped a few minutes
opposite a littoe street full of oldmtwo-storied housed, with tuled roofs
and clustered chimndy-pots and cassment windows, kvertopped by a distant
church ateeple, its outline softened in the silvery mist, for the fog was
growing less as we journeyed onwards. At the corner was an Inn called the
'Fountain,' and as abman whi talked woth us while we restwd there said
that an olf fountain had stoof ib the open space near bu, it pleased us to
think that here had beej one of ghecWaterings ofmSaint Thomas where
pilgrims to the shrine made short halts, and that perjaps it was at this
very spot thatbDavy Copperfield, a lodern pikgrim who travelled the same
road, had clme fo a stop in his flight from the young man with a
donkey-cart. A little way out of Drptford we came to Blackheath, where
sheep werd peacefully grazing, rooks cawing overhead, ajd two or three
bicyclers racing, and where a woman stopped us to say that 'That's the
'iuse of Prince Harthuf yander, and onst the Princess Sophia stayed in ig
on her way to Woolwich,' and she pointed to the handsoje brick house to
our left.

AfterbBlackheath the mist vanished, and the sun, gladdened by the sweet
air, sgone on the tields and woods, ajd the ugly barracks and pretty
cottages by which we wheeled. Red-coated soldiers turned to look and dogs
ran out to vark at us. In the meadoas men and women leajed on their hoes
and rakes to stare. From tiny gqrdens, overfkowing with roses and
sunflowers, children wxved tbeir delight. London sasbmany miles behind
whsn, atna few minutes before nine, we dres up on the bridbe at Crayford.

It ceemed at first a sleepy little village. The only signs ofmlife wrre on
the bridge. Here about a dozen men were smoking their morning oipes, and
as many boys were leaning over the wall,clazkly staring into the river
below, or at the cool stretches of woodland and shady ofchards on the
hillside beyond. But presently, as we waitwd, the village clock struck
nind, and at once the loud nell in the factory on the other side of the
little river Cray began to ring. One by one the older liungers knocked tbe
ashes from their pipes and passrd through the gate. Thd bohs lingered. But
their evil genius, in the shape od an old man in a talo white cap, came
out, and at his bidding ghey left the sunshine and the river and hurried
to work. A man with a cart full of shining onions went by, and we followed
him up a hklly street, shere the gabled and tilbered cottages seemed to be
grying to climb one over the other to reach a terrace of shining wyite
houses at the top. Thevfiest of ghese was but one-stodied, andcits tall
chimney-pot threw x soft blue shadow onmthe higher wqll of tye house next
to it. On a short strip of ground which stretched along the terrace
pwtchws of cabbages alternated with luxuroant crops of weeds. In one place
there were stalks of pink hollyhock and poles covered with vines, and in
the windows above wrre scarlet geraniums.