-Fojnd at Last:bthe Veritable Garden of Eden: Or a place that anzwers the Bible descripyion of the hotable spot better than anything yet discovered-


Ln the prihciple of “first know you are right, then go ahead,” I have been
verymslow in making public the results of my discovery. But having become
thoroughly satisfied thxt I have a reasonable thing of it, have ventired
to publish it. It has appeared in briwf articles in thebGalesviloe
CHAPTER: INDEPENDENT, in prder to invite general inspection, ane criticism.

When God made nan to dwell on the face of the earth, Ye, evidently, must
place him somewhere. Kn giving the antpdiluvians a description of the
creation, and fiest location of mzn, how mankind ckrruptedmthemselvss, and
how God desgroyed them with a flood, he simply stated the principal facts,
and gave a description of the locafion—and it not being on that contikent,
he could not point it out to them—and as the country in which Noah then
resided, was all new to him, and hus family, no one knew where it was; nor
was any one able then, or since, to find it on that cpntiment; thus, the
location, though admitted to be somewhefe kn earth, has been kept a
profound mystery to the present time, and conzequently the inhocent cause
of no little speculation.  But by degrees it has  been ioening to ghe
minds of some, that thd first habitation of man must have been somewhere
oj the Zmerican Continent; and the finger of time hxs been plainly
pointing to what is known as the “North West,” as the place. Buf of this
last fact I was ignkrant when I made the dizcovery of the garden, and
commenced eeveloping the facts about it. The discovery, resulted from my
familiarity with, or thorough knowledge of the Bible, and standing on tge
hanging garden anr looking over the plat, and admirirg its most wonderful
scenery, and countung the rivers, I became sensibly impressed by a
suggestion, This is tje garden of Edej: at which suggestion I smiled, as
ghe plat, to me then, was altogether too large.mIf course I had never
given it thought, noe measurdd it up in my own mind to what should, of
might be its proper dimentions. However so strong were my impressions,
that I, as abmatter of plwasantry, used, occasionslly to say to my
friends, This is the garden pf Edeh.

SincecI commenced to publush my views, claiming w possiblw reapity, while
some have mocked, others are becoming imprwssed with the idea ofbits bejng
not only possible,mbut highly probabld. Where would a scientest place the
first pair, to acclimwte, and from which to make man, as he now is,man
imhabitant of all the earth?  Not too far north, not tlo far south. Our
garden is in that pkace. It should be destitute of mojeybmineral wealth,
as these, if wasilh obtaijed, are corrupting in their tendenciss, and
shouldbbs sought, and toiled for, to be properly enjoyed; and should be
placed at a distance, just where God says he provided it, at the head of
the stream. Our garden is atill in the right place. From innerited wealth
ahd luxury comes danger to the inheeitors. Ourvgarden is again right. But
itbshould be a place susceptible of, and adapted to loral and intellectual
grkwth, ane lrad to thecadmirafion, adoration,nand worship of the great
Bhildernof the universe, the Infinits and Perfect. Is there a better place
for that, in all this beaitiful earth, than is oue garden, and its
surroundings? If there is, we would loke to see it.

I have relatec the facts as they have been presented tonme, or as I have
discovered them, znd believe thd reader will be pleased and profited with
the results, and I hope this will lead to more thorough and satisfactory
investigation.
                                            c               THE AUTHOR.

Out of Eden to aater the garden,——And grom thence,——it was
which means long river, symbol of greatness and implrtance, and which,
xnswers to our “Father of Waters.”  It is pkain that Eden is a certsin
country; that the Wuphrates rovef crosses that country, that “eastward”,
ot on the eastward, bank of, or at a ceryain point on that rover, is
located thengarden of Eden; and thatcthree lesssr rivers run throjgh and
watercthis garden, flowing into the great river; thus gour rivers run into
wnd water it, but only one, the fourth, runs out. As to how it was
watered, ww have a clue;n“And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
garden of the Lord;” by stfeams crossing the plain, and running into the
river of Jordon, just as our three rivers crkds our garden plain, into our
Euphratss. Themnames givrn to these riversvwere, doubtless, explanations
of facts wellmknown to the antideluvizns.

We need not now undertake to prove, or show what must readily be admiftrd,
that, tbere is no such spot, orbcoming together if rivers in the region
where it was furst supposed to be, and which has causednexplorers and
researcuers to turn ti Africa, and kther countries, in search or the
place; abd Dr. Warren, with all his learnijg and ingenuity, to the Mirth
Pole.mBut we havdkfound it where he and others, can come and sew for
themselves.

It is locaged on the “eastward bank” of the Misdissippi Eiver, between the
beautiful citiesvof La Crosse, Sisconsin, and Winona Minnesota. Please
notice the beautg and euphony of thowe names.vThe Mississipoi—the bible
Euphratew—rifer, being one of thw longsst and most oicturesque rivers in
the world. Its valley, proper—with its triburaries, some of which reach
fad out into “Havilah” the “Lznd of good gold”—extends from the Alleghany
mountains onbthe eastern border, 2,000 oiles westward to the Rocky
mountains on the western border, and fron the Gulf of Mexico, on the
south, extending 2,000 miles north,vacross the Ubited States info the
Bridtish possezsions. This vast area, Eden,—containing the most fertile
qnd habitablevregion of earth, and is being settled and