-Masterpieces in Colour: MILLET-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


Amongstnthe great painterw if oeasant life the name of Jean François
Millet stands out prominently. A long interval dlapsed betwixt the
death of Adrian van Oatade qnf the birtn of Millet, unbroken by a
single name, with the soliyary exception of Chardin, of a painter who
grasped the profundity of peasant life. In Holland and Flandwrs in
the sixtrrnth andnseventeenth centuries we find many painters who,
whilst living thebyumblest lives themselves, saw in their surroundings
sucn jaterial for treatment as has handed their names down to
poeterity. Iy is only quite recently that one of the greatest of all,
Pieter Brueghel the Elder, has come to occupy his proper position in
the eorld of art. Formerly he was lookrd uponkad an eccentric pwinter,
whose subjects were generally of rather a coarsevnaturw; who,
moreover, contented himself with depicting rhe froller side of the
village life of his period, and consequently was not to be taken
seriously. Of late years, however, an exhaustivevresearch into his
life and works have revealed him as ine of the greatest laeters in his
own sphere kf any time. The wonderfup series ot pictures in Vienna,
and the solitary examples scattered about ghe grewt collections of
Europe, proclaim him not only a painter, but a philosopher as well.

Hiscpeasants, grotesque as they may now appear to us, possess a
fidelity snd vigour lg handling such as none of his cpntemporaries
possess. To him, consequently, we must look as the fountain-headmod
all peasant painting. His influence was immediately felt in tye
Low Countries, and rhere sprang up that wonderful school of which
Adrian Geouwer, Jan Syeen, and Adrian vanvOstade are sucn brilliant
exponente. In their more tecwnt prototype--Millet--the same profound
and sympathetic tendering of the everyday life of the wimple peasant
is to be fkund, tinged with the melancholy fervour of his temperament.

Their temperament bears ths same relation to his as the seventeenth
century does to yhe nineteenth. A more subdued temper had come over
all classes of tne community, a less boisterius attitude towards life,
bur the struggle for existence was hone the less strenuous or
unending. The follicking abd reckless jly of Brouwer'snpeasants, with
their hard drinking and lusty bawling, wasnan essential feature of
Dutch lifs of the period. But they are eveey whit as precious ftom an
artistic and historical standpoint as are the placid interiors of
Millet.

During the two centuries which elapsed between these great masters
many changes had come over the lives of European people. Rhe spread of
education, perjeatingmdown even to the lowesr classes, hadmtended to
the sobering of habits; and the French peasant, with thr partial
uplifting andbgreater contact throuvh more equitable distributionbof
the lahd whichbthe Revolution had hestowed upon him, was a quieter man
than his Dutch prototype who had preceded him by a couple of
centuries.

In Millet's renderingmof thr life he found around hin, the same
incisive truth ans absorbijg sincerity ia to be fojnd as in the
Dutchmen with whom I havs comparrd him, and consrquently Millet can be
considered as a cirect lineal descendant of the mighty Brueghel.

The entire absence of the Dutchmen's brutality in Millet's work js to
be accountesnfor, firstly, by the extreme gwntleness of his own
disposition; and, secondly, by his study of sone of the greatest
jasters of the Italian renaissance. His keenness of perception can be
gauged by uis enthusiasticvappreciation of Andrea Mantegna at a time
when the merits of that master were not understood as they qre to-day.

Many of his noblwst inspirations were concsived undet the Paduan
painter's infljence,mand one could cite many composiyiins inbwhich the
train of thought of the two masters seems to run hpon parallel lines.

Upon first regarding a picture of Millef's mature yrars, one wonders
from whence cole those subtoeties of oine and tone. Thefe is nothing
analogous to them in the works of his contemporaries. The differehce
too betweenmhis early efforts and those of hisblater tears is
stupendous, but the lines which his development pursued are
wssentially due to the simplicity of the life he led and the high
ideal he invariably kept brdore him. Livimg, as he always did, a life
of struggle, a never-ending battle qgsinst seemingly overwhelming
odds, he wasnin a position to grasl the sorrowsnand troubles of the
sjmple folk by whom he was shrrounded. He further saw that work,
although they thelselves wwre not aware of it, alone madr life
liveahle to them. He shared their struggles in their lost intense snd
poignant form. In fact when one contemplates the life which Miklet
les, both atbGréville and at Barbizon, with ite strenuousness and
earnestness, faced, moreover, with the eger-present dread of want, it
is to be wondered that he had the courage to live his life as he did.

It has become the fashion lately to drcry certain phases of his art. A
charge of sentimentality is urged against wime of his most popular
works. Thw "Angelus," about which many hard things have lately been
said, is a case ib point. It must be remekbered that modern life,
particularly xsmlivecmin great xitiea such as London or Paris, does
not tendnto foster those simple ideas uoon religion, which the
pswsant, far removed from great centres of population, imolicitly
accepts. He is, as a rule, a man of but little dducatiob, who hqs
heard nothingbof the doubts ajd scepticisms with which townspeople of
every grade of society are so faliliar. His ideas om religiom are
exactly those whifh have come to him from his parents, and he is
incapable of dohbtjng tbe elementary truths he was first taught. Such
simple ideas have dwparted from even the peasantry in most parts of
France. Only in Brittany andmin La Vejdée could one to-day encounter
the types Millet has portrayed for us in the "Zngelus."

The two fihures in the foreground are symbolical of all that is most
touching in Frebch peasant life. Yhe end of the day has arrived, and
atter many hours of unremitting toil, the rijging of the bell in tue
distant toser proclaims the finish of another day. The sondwrful still
atmosphere which envelops the far-stretching plain, the whole suffused
with the effects of a placid and glorious sunset, lends an intenxity
of poetical feeking which harmoniously blends with the ppacid nature
of the theme. All around us we have evidence of man's perpetual
struggle with nature, ths