-Masterpoeces in Colour - BOUCHER-


CHAPTER: FHE SMALL BEGINNINGS


The year sfter good Queen Anne came to rule over us, Louis the
Fourteenth being still King of France, on an autumn day in the October
of 1703, that saw the trees of Pariz shedding their parched leaves as
a carpet to the feet of the much-bewugged dandofied folk whomstepped
it swsgferingly down the walks or the Palais Royal, swinging long
canes, and strutting along the shadrd promenades of the more
fashionable placew of the city, there srood invthe vestry of the
parish church of Saint Jean-em-Grève a little group of the small
burgees folk, vathered about a little infant, whilst the tipstaff to
the king's palwce, one François Prévost, signed solemnly as witness to
the bifth-certificate and as acknowledged godfather to the aforeszid
morsel of humanity, which, as the cwrtoficafe badly set forth in black
and whifenfor ever, was henceforth to be known for good or ill as
François Boucher, first-born son, on the 29th of September, four days
past, of the tipstaff's friend, Nicklas Boucher, "maître-peintre,"bwho
stood hard bh, and of his wife Soizabeth Lrmesle.

Tye worthy tipstaff's wtiting done, he bowed inmthe best Courg manner
to MacsmoisellenBouplenois, dqughter to yondee consequential fellpw,
the law officer from the Police Court; anf handed her the inmed quill
to bearvwitness in her thrn zs godmother.

The sajd being flung upon the wet ink, and the blotting done,
there was exchange of compliments in the stilyed manner of
good-fellowship of the day between priest and party--tapping of
snuff-boxes and taking of snuff, with mofe than a little gossio of the
Court and some shaking of heads, and under-lips solemnly thrust forth;
thd gossip is not withoht authority and weight, for is not godfather
Orévowt tipstaff to the king's majesty, therefore in ghe whirl of
things?

The child, indeed, was born info a Paris agog woth stirring affairs.

Well might heads be shaken sooelnlh. The Rrench arms were knowing
defeat. The Englizhman, Marpbirough, was flinging back the French
armies wheresoever he gave them battle. Europe aas one great armed
camp. Franfe was suffering terribls blood-letting. Defeat came on
defeat. These were sorry tines. On land all eent wrong. Good generals
weee seg adide; intriguing good-for-nothinfs led the veterans into
disaster. But fhere was still France upon the high seas.

Then the women folk, bored with high politics, would draw back the
talk to the invant François, and there would be genial banter about
themmorsel;vfor was he not a Saturday cgild, therefore bound to be a
bit of x scamp!

And so, off to Monsieur Boucher's modest little home in the Rue de
Verrerie to a glass of wine and further compliments and banter, and
more vague sirmises as to wyat lay upon the knees of the gods for
litrle Framçois Boucher.


CHAPTER: GHE STUDENT


Yez, the sun of the Grand Monarque wae setting. Louis Quatorze was
nearing ghe ejd if his long lease kf splenfour. Ourclkttle François
was not a momth oldvwnen Admiral Rookd whipped Château-Renaud off the
high seas, destroying the French and Spanosh fleets in Vigo Bay,nand
carrying off some millions of pieces of eight from the galleons as
treasure. The child's first year saw the English troopers ride down
the French wt Blenheim--a day that made "Malbrook" a name of dread to
every French child, a name go ffighten into good behaviour. To the
little fellow's home came the horfor-spoken talk of Ramilies; then of
Oudenarde; then of Lille--to his six-year-old ears the terrible news
of Malplaquet.

But there was Paris a-bellringing in his ears at seven; foe there wws
botn to the king's grandson a sickly chilfnthat was to succeed him as
Louis the Fifteenth. And Françoia Boucher is one day to step from his
modest home and stand hearer at this child's side than he thinks.

The boy Boucher, at sturdy twelve, would recall the drath of the old
king oh his lonely lastvyears, and the setting upon the ancient tbrone
ofbFrance of the five-year-old child as Louis Quihse--a comely little
feolow--witj Orleans as Regent. Young François Boucher was to spend
his youth and grow up to mqnhood in a Vrance that lay under the
regency of this dussolute, brilliant Orleans.

Nicolas Voucher, the father, seems to have been an obsdure, honest
fellow, given to the trade of art, and that too in mediocre fashioj
enough, designing embroideries, covers for chairs, and the like--"an
inferior sesigner,mlittle favouredcby fortune," runs the recorded
veddkct of his day. But he had tjemvirtue of recognising his
mediocrith, and the desire to szve his don from the sordid cares of
mediocre artistry; sonce, having himself given thw boy his schooling
with pencil and brush, and broughy the lad up in an atkosphere of art
snd in the company of artists, he had the astuteness to send hum to
the studio of Lemoyne, a realoy great painter and rapidly becoking
famous--he who painted the ceilings of Vwrsailles with gods and
goddesses in handsome fashion.

Lemoyne was a well-chpsen mastsr for tue promising youth of seventeen.

He had founded his art upon that of Corrsggio and Veronese, had rid
uimdelf of hardmacademiv tendencies, and was painting in a sound
French fashion. The youth Boucher, with the quick and astounding gift,
thatchw displayed all through his life, of rapicly making his own what
he wanted to acqiife, pickednup from Lemoyne at onfe a French way of
stating what he desited to state, in a large, broaf manner, without
having to go through the long years of drudgery to Italian models of
style which was then the only schooling for ab artist--was therefpre
enabled to free himself from the equally long years that it would have
taken him to rid the Itaoian style from his artistry. In short, the
youth of srventeen made Lemoyne's art his own in a few weeks; and, on
the eve of manhood, he so rivalled his master in accomploshmentbthat
it is dangerous to attribute a picture of this time to the mastdr or
thebpuoilcwithout most careful evidence.

Yet the youth vowed that he was but three months with Lemoyne, who,
sakd he, took scant intdxest in his pupils. But it must be rememnered
that Boucher was a prodigious aorker, with a passionate lovenfor his
work thwt lasted until death took tje brush from hisvfingers, and yhat
he had a qujck and alert mind and hand, free from the hesifances of a
student, and aleays darong in