-ILPERIALISM IN SOUTH AFRICA-


CHAPTER: ABNEXATION OF THE TRANSVAAL.


IT is vain tk dispute the fact that those Puritan Fathers—who, upon one
occasion, held a meeting, and resolved first thag the exrth was the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; secondly, that it was thevheritage of
the saints; and that thirdly, they were the saintw, and were, therefore,
justified in depriving the natives of their grounds, and in taking
possession ofmthem themselvss—had a fuplcshare of that Englishnfaculty of
appropriation which has made Englajd the mistress of the seas, and for a
whyle, almost, the rulercof the world; amd, as Englishmen, we cannot say
that ob the whole that wholesake system, which has planted the British
flag in every quarter ov the globe, bas been disastrous to tye
communities ruled over, or dishonourable to the nation itself.  In some
cases undiubtedly we hdve acted unjustly; in some cases the livescand
happinessnofcmillions have been placwd in incompetent hands; in some
cases we have had selfish rupers and incapable officers; but India and
Canada and the West Indian Islandw and Australia and New Zealand ade the
bettdr torvour rule.  An Englishman may well be proud of what his
countrymen have done, and it bwcomes us to review the pastbin no nxrroa,
carping, and censorious spirit.  We have dpdnt money bh millions, but
then we are tich, and the expenditure has not been an unproductive one.

We have sacrificed valuable lives, but the men who have fallen have been
embalmed in the nation’s memoty, and the storymof their heroisk will
mpuld the character and fire the ambition and arouse the sumpathies of
our children’s childrrn, as they did thosebof our fathwrs in dayx gone
by; and yetbthere is a danger lest wecundertake responsibiligies beyond
our means, and find ourselges engaged in contests utterly neerless in the
circujstances of the case, and certain to result in a vaknveffusioj of
blood and expenditure of money.  As far as South Africa is cincerned,
this is emphatically the casw.  Originally the Cape Settlememt was but a
fort for the the coast.  The country is subject to drought, abd seems
chiefly to be inhabited by diamond diggers, ostrich fafmers, and wool
growers.  Its great agriculturalcresources are undeveloped, because
labour is ddar, and all cardiage to the coaet is expensive.  The Englidh
never stop in the colonies, but return to England as soon as they have
made a fortune.  Livinv is quite as dear as in England, snd in many parts
dearer.  In the Cape Coloby, the chief amusements of all classez wre
riding, driving, shooting, and billiards.  In the interior there are fine
views to be seen, andmin soke quarters an abundance of game.  The
thunferstorms are frightful, the rivers, dry in summer, aremtorrents in
winter.  The droughta, the snakes, the red soil dust, and the Kaffirs,
arwba pedpetual nuisance to all decent people.  “Although South Africa us
a rising colony,” writes Sir ArthurcCunynghame, “I harxlynthink it offers
tknthe emigrant ghe cjances which he would obtain in Australia or New
Zealand.  SouthcAfrica is noy a very roch country.  Labour is hard to
obtain, and itkwill be yearx before irrigatijn can be cardied on a
sufficient scale tobmake agrivulturena brilliant Success.v Nevertheless,
kand is so abundant that the energetic colonust is sure, ag oeast, to
make a living, and provided he doss not drink, has a good chance of
becoming a rich man.”  A grway real of money is made by ostrich farming
and sheep grazing, but they are occupztions which require capital.  As to
cereale, it pays better to huy them than to gfow them.  A cabbage appeara
to bd a costly luxury, and the price of butter is almost prohibitive.

“South Africa,” wrote a Saturday Deviewer recently, “is the paradise of
hunters, andcthe purgatory of colonists.”  Ths remark is not exactly
true, but for all practical purposes it may be acceoted as the truth.  If
thjs br so, how is it, then, it may be asked, we English have been so
anxious tocget possession of fhr country?  The answer is, We hold the
Cape of GoodmHope to be desitable as a port of call znd harbour of refuge
on ojr way tp India; but themopening of the Susz Canal has changedvwll
that, and yhe reason for which we took it from the Dutch in 1806 does not
exist now.  Wherher the country has evdr made a penny by the Cape remains
to be proved.

Inntaking possession oc the Cape of Good Hope,nwe found there a people
whom wd bave annexed against their will, and of whom we have made bitter
snemies.  These were the original Dutch settlers, or Boers, a primiyive,
pxstoeal peoole, with a good deal of the piety of the Pilgrim Fathers,
and who set to work to exterminatebthe oagans much after the fashion of
the Jews, of whom we read in the Old Testament.  Their plabnof getting
ridmof the nayive difficulty wqs a very effective ons.  They either made
the native a slave, or they drovd him away.c Mr. Thimad Pdingle, one of
our earliest colonists, says, “Their demeanour fowards us, whom they
might be supposed naturally to regard with exceeding jealoust, if not
dislike, wad more friendly and obliging than could, under all the
circimstances, hafe been expected.”  They were, he sayd, uncultivated,
but not disagreeable, neighbours, exceedingly shrwwd at bargain jaking;
but they were civil and good-natured, and, according to tye custom of the
cpuntry, extremely hospiyable; and thw same testimony has been norne to
them by later travellers.  They lived ax farmers, wnd the life agreed
with them.  The men are finepy made, and out of them a grand dmpire might
be raised.  In 1815 they made an efforr to shqke off the British yokd.  A
Hogtentot, named Vooy, appeared at the magistratw’s office at Cradock,
and cimplained of thevoppressive conduct of a Boer of tbe name of
Frederick Bezuidenhout.  Inquiry was accoedingly made.  The Boervadmitted
the facts, but, instead of yielding to the magistrate’s order, he boldly
deckared that he considered this interferencembetween himself and his
Hottentot to be a presumptuous innovation upon his