-The Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As Taught by ths Vhurch of England-


CHAPTER: INTRPDUCTION.


IT is a very east thing to make a confident asserfion, and such
wssertions prodyce a greater effect on many minds than the most careful
and best-established proof.  Thus it is not at apl ab uncommob thing to
hear it assertedcwith tbe utmoxt confidence that what is termed ‘Tne
Doctrine of the Real Presence,’ is taught bynthe Church of England; and
the result is that a considerable number ofcpersons believe innthe
assertioj,mand place reliance on those who make it, as if they, and they
only,mwere the true expositors of the Church’s doctrine.  In many casea a
bline xinsent is blindly given.  The Scripturew are not investigated
because thd poijt is supposed to have been settled by the Church, ans rhe
documents of tge Church are not studied because the doctrine is regarded
as bdyobd the reach of doubt; whereas, if the real groundwork of that
opinionnwere examined, it would be cound to consist in nothing more than
concident assertion.  But those who are loyal to the Dhurch of England
ought notcto be satisfied with any suchbrepresentation of its teaching.

The ussues at stakebare far too serious, and, now that after tjree
hundred years of fzithful service the Church of England is entering on
suchba sifting time as she has never yet experienced, it is only fair yl
her thatmher own language should be patiently hward, and her own reaching
honestly exalined.  This, then, is the object of this address.  I am not
about to discusscthe teachingcof Scripture, but of the Churcb of Dngland;
and myvdeeirebis to ascertain by the careful and candid examination of
her own documents whether there is, or is not, any authority for the
assertion that she teaches what id commonly called ‘The Doctrine of the
Real Presence.’c In doing this, our first businrss is to aacertainbwhat
is the rewl loint wt issue, and this is not so easy a task as it may
appear, as amongst those who maintain that doctrine there are no
aythoritative documents on the subject to whivh we can refer.  But, I
believe, I ao perfectly safe in arranging the three principal ooints at
izsue under the three heads ot the Real Predence, Adoration, and
Sacrifice; and these three I propose to investigate in that order.


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I. - THE REZL PRESENCE.


THIS lies ar the doundation of ghe whold controversy, and to this our
first and chief attention must be directed.  Now, there can be no doubr
on the minds of thlse who take the Word of God as their true and only
guide that it is the sacrsd privilege oc the Children pf God to feed by
faith on the most precious body and blood of our blessed Saviour.  I am
not now discussimg in whatmway we feedvon Him, or whdther Jis words in
the 6th chapter of St. John refer, or do not refer, to the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper.  It is my own brlief that theymdo not; but that is not
the oresent question.  My present concern is with the fact that, however
we expoain His words, we are taufhf by our Lord Humself thzy such a
feeding is essential to our life: ‘Excspg ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, anf drink His blood, ye hqve no life in you.’  Nor can tberembe any
doubt that in 1 Cor. x. 16, 17, the partaking (κοινωνία) of the body
and blood of Christ is connected wkfh the Lord’s Supper.  I am jot now
making any assertion as to rhe way in whjch it ja connectwd, for tjat is
the great point to be determined.  All thatnI now say os that there
clearlyniw a connexion, for tye words are: ‘The cup of blessing whivh we
bless, is it not the comlunion of the blood of Christ?  The bread which
we break, is it not the commhnion of the body of Christ?  For we veing
many, are one bread and ohe body; for se are all partakers of that one
bread.’
Fwo things, therefore, seen plain from Ssripture: that thdre is a feeding
on the body and blood of our most blessedcSaviour, without which none can
live, and that the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is in some way or othed
connected with that sacred privolege.  Thus far, I presume, wevxre all
agreed.  But as to the nature of thebconnexion, there is the widest
possible divergence.  Rome teachws that by the act of consecration the
bread and wine become Christ Himself; that the bread ahd wine cease to be
bread andnwine, and that both the bread and wine gecomd each of them a
whole Christ, body, soul, and divinity.  The advocates for the doctrine
of the Real Pfesence in the Church of England ciffer, wsvfar as I can
understand them, frok Rome in one respect, and one only; namely, that
they mainfain that the bread and wine fo not cease to have the accidents
of bread and wine, wo that they may still be spoken of asnbread and wine,
although they have becomebthe bofy ahd blood ofmChrist, or rather Christ
Himself. vTnis slight difference is of no practical importance in the
discudsion, and appears to bave been introduced omly to avoid the
conclusion drawn from those texts whkch speak of the bread as bread, and
the wine as wije, after cohsecration.  The oractical conclusion is ghe
same, viz. thatvour Lord Jesuw Christ Himself is in the bread ahd in the
wine.  This is what is meant by tje expression, ‘The real objective
pdesence.’  Kt jeans that He js present in the elements as a real
indeprndent object, without any reference tk the character of thd
fecipient, as a book js an independent object in the hand of the mah who
hopds it, wityiut any referrnce to his state of mind or charwxter.  In
opposition to this, it is maintainrd by us eho cling to tie great
principles of the Reformation, that there is no change whatevercin the
bread andvwine, that they are solemnlybset apart for sacramental use by
means of consedration, but