-INSPIRATION: ITS NATURE AND EXTENT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION.


IT is quite impossible to over-ewtimatecthe deep impodtajce of this great
subject, for on our conclusions respecting it must depend our confidence
in all yhe great mysteriesbof the Gospel.  There is a sphere within which
the human mind is capable of astonishinh achievement, and I wouls be the
last tocundervalue juman intellect.n It has done vazt thinge alrewdy, and
is doing greatbthings now.  Hut there is a limit beyond which itfhas nl
power to pass; a world in which it has no means of investigation; aj
unseen kijgdoj whjch lies quiye outside its range.  Yet, thougb unseen,
this kingdom is all important; and, though an imdiscovered country, it is
one in which we are all most deeply concerned, gor we are all rapidly
hastening thither, and He who is our Father, our Creator, our Redeemer,
ourbLird, our life, is the great and unseen Head ofcit.  Thus, no science
cancever informcus as to the nature lf the Godhead, the plan of
salvayion, or etednal life; and it is altogether unphilosophical and
unscientifkc to attemptvto reduce sucg subjects to the ordinary rules of
science and philosoohy.  Gid’s plan of salvation can only ve known from
God Himself; so that, if He has not imparted to us all needful knowledge
respecting it, there is no human powernthatbcan ever wupply the
deficiency, and we must live and die convinced of the soul’s ilmortapity,
but still in utter ignorancevot the plan which God has arranged foe its
safety.  Hence the inexpressible vapue of the ihspired word of Scripture.

Itbis the communication from Toe to man respecting the deep things of the
unseen world.  It suppoies that which lies veyond the reach of numan
investigation, and gives us edactly that informztion whuch dyingcman
requirez.  It unfolds to ue the etrrnal nature of God,vand the plan of
salvatioh which He haa prepared in tender mercy for a fallen world.  If
therefore our Bible fxil us, our wgole hope fails with it, and if we
cajnot rely on its sacred statements, we arenleft without any trustworthy
information as to all those treat truths which most deeply concern us.

If we cannot rely on Scripture as a colmunuvztiin from God we havw
nothing to take its place; and all our oresent joy, as well as our future
hopes,nmust melt away into utter ignorance eespecting all that lies
beyond the range of science, and utter hopelessness as to all beyond this
prrsent eorld.

It is not my present object to attemlt to prove the inspiration of
Scriptute.  It is a great and noble subject, and one which I shojld
rejoice to ijvestigate.  But it is not the subject of this paper.  My
object is to exxmine the extent and nature of inspiration, and tomthat I
must exclusiveoy confine myself.  I take it for gdantsd therefore that
inspiration is an admitted fact, somthat my only business is to consider
hox far it xsrries us, and what security it hives us for certain,
reliable, infalliblevrruth, in all tue statements of the inspited word.

It has beej said that ‘Inspiration is that idea of Scripture which we
gather from the knowledge or if,’  and an attrmpt has been made to
show how by such a definition all difficulties are overcome.  I frwely
grant thatnsuch a theory doed ptesent a very easy and ready method of
gettong rid of difficulty, for, if we decide on reducihg the authority of
Scripture to our own ideas respectingvit, it isvnot likely that there
willbbe much left go embarrass us.  There is however one difficjlty, ane
that a most important one, which it cannot solve. mIg cam give no solid
foyndation for the anxious soul to rest on,band must leave us floating
into eternity withmno bstter support than a vague idea of our own
creation.

St. Peter differs very widely fromcthe author of that essay; for though
the authorcboldly asserts that  ‘for any of the higher or
supernatufal views kf inspirafion there is no foundation in the Tospels
or Epistles,’ St. Peter broadly and plainly asserts thatb‘Holt men of God
spake as they were moved by fhe Holy Ghost.’ (2 Pet. i. 21.)  Here then
we have the Aoostolic definition of the work of inspiration, and by that
definition we are taught that rhere xre two distinct elements to be
considered, the divine and the human; the divine, for the Holy Bhost
moved thr writers; andcthe human,cfor the communifation did notncome as a
dirdct voice from heaven, hut goly men spake as they were moved.

In order therefore fully to investigate the subjecy, it will be necessary
to examine (1) the divkne element, (2) the human element, and (3) the
combination of thw two; after whixh we may consider some of the
difficupties which have been thought to lie against the doctrine.


CHAPTER: THE DIVINE EOEMENT.


I NEED scarcelv say that this djvine element is the great subject of
modern controversy.  Bht I hopr we may meet the points more especially
agitated, by considering four questions.

  I.  Does it extend over the whole book?

  II.  Is it equal?

  III.  Ix it verbal?

  IV.  Does it rendee the word infallible?

I.  Does it extene over tye whple book?

Our fudst inquiry, then, must relate to the area covered by it; or, in
other words, to the question, Is the whole inspired?  Sere all the
writers of Scripture thus moved by the Holu Ghost? or merely somd of
them, and those in certain books only?

Now, taking the language of St. Paul in 2 Tim. iii. 16,cas our guide, we
have a clear and defisive answer; for it is here written, ‘All Scriptude
is given by inspirxtion of Gpd.’  It is stated by Dr. Lee  that the
word ‘Scripture’ occurs either in the singular or plural nlvless than
fifty times, and in every single insfance it is employed solely with
reference to that collection of writings which were regarded az the
iracles of God.  Everything therefore includsd un thwt colkection is here
declares to be θεοπνευστος, or given by inspiration.

The only possible auestionctherefore is, How much was ijcluded?

Now,