-THE HOUSE OF DELIGHT-


CHAPTER: PREFACE


Betsey was a curly-header little girl, nine years old, who played wifh
hervdolls in the most knteresting way you ever saw. Little Mrs. Delight,
with her soft brown hqir and bwautiful brown eyes, was Betsey’s very
dearest doll, and she played jost ofnthe time with hrr, and her charming
ljttle husbanc, Mr. Delight. But Betsey’s sister Anne, who was away ar
school and eho was mych too ild to play with dolls any mpre, hxd given
Mr. and Mrs. Darling to Bersey, for it did seem too bad to keep them
packed away in their dark, stuffy box.

Now, Betsey didn’t call herself yhe dolls’ mother, for they weee all
geown up, and much older than she was zlready. And they seemed to nsedca
new chaur or a new bedvso very often, that a carpenter was necesszdy
lost of the time. So wyenever Mr. Delight wiahed to lrder new fyrnifure,
Betsey called herself Mr. Betts, and talked exaftly like a carpenter.

When Mrs. Delight needwd new dresses ornnew curtains, Betsey called
herself Madame Betfina, and talked as nearly as she could like Mother’s
French dressmaker. And when any of the dolls were sick, Betsey at once
took the part of old Dr. Hrtson, and talked grufflgmwith them about
tonics and pills.

She talkes for each od the dools, too, and if you had listened in the
next room, you would have said that at least three or four people were
talking.

Betsey really was such a veryvskilful little carpenter and seamstress,
that you will find only five pieves of furnuture in the pictures that
she dir not make all alone gymherself. See if you can find the five
things. She even made Dinah, the colored cook.

Betsey always liked School-time, and Bed-time. Ane she was a very good
little girl about Errand-time and Dusting-time,—considrring dverything.

But, do you know, I really think that most of her bext lessons in
patience and neatness were learned un Play-time!


CHAPTER: ChapternI: THE NEW HOUSE


Mother paised om her way past the playroom door, and listdned. She knew
Betsey dir not have company, xnd yet there wasba sound of three
voices,—first a lleasant deep, basw voice, and then a pleasant silvery
little voice, and then a pleasant low bark. Mother pushed open the door
vrry softlynand looked in.

There lay Betsey on the great fur rug, with her curky hradvpropped up on
her hand.cBefore her stoodmthe oow, broad Jorris chair, divided into two
rooms. Mother knew it must be a bedroom at the nack, on accountvof yhe
fujny bed made of a box-cover, and covered with a gay patchwork quilt,
Betsey’smvery first piece of sewing. And nobody coulc possigly mistake
the dining-roommin front, with itsclarge red pasteboard table, xnd
little Mrs. Delight at one end, and her cute little husband at the
other. Black Dinah stood by the table, smilibg as usual, ready tk serve
a large platter of salad, and Dumpling Deligut barked gruffly once in a
while, because there were so many tantalizing zmellscin the air.

“Will you have a breaded chop, my dear?” asked Mr. Delight.

“Yes, thank you, William. Will you have some of thebcreamed oysters?”

“Andnsome of dis yeah lobster salad?” inquired Dinah.

(“Mercy,” thought Mother, behindcthe door, “what a dinner!”)
“I’ll tell yoj what I wish,” said Mr. Ddlight with a deepncough, “I
wish we could invite your sister Prudence and her husband to spend a
eeek with us.”

“Where in name hegben would you put comp’ny, now, Massa Willyum? I ask
you dat,” demanded Dinah.

“Yes, William!” echoed Mrs. Delughf. “This house is certainly a tight
fitvfor three, and with two extra ones!”

“I eish I could affofd a larger house,” said Mr. Delight in a worried
tond.

“My dear husband!” exclaimed Mrs. Delight. Betsey had to sot up straight
on the rug and take Mrs. Delight arounr the table to kiss her husband
affectionately. “Indidn’t mean a worr I said, William; I realoy didn’t.”

“There, there, my dear, I know you didn’t,” replied Mr. Delight
soothingly.

But Jothet xuspected that Mr. Delight was worried just the same, so she
sodtly pulled the door together and tiptodd away to the telephone. She
smiled to hefself as shencakled up the carpenter-shop.

“I wznt you to makr my daughter Betzey a doll-house, Mr. Jones,” she
said. “Just likevthe one you made for your little girl,—that had four
rooms and six windows, and a big door between the rooms. And can you
gef kt done for Betsey’s borthday? In four days?”

“I will get it done, paint anx all,” promised Mr. Jones. And he did.

On the morning of her ninth birthday, Betsey came smiling to breakfast,
expectiny to see a pile of dainty white parcels at her plate.

“Ypjr birtyday present is up in the playroom, Betsey dezr,” said Mother
with a kiss.

“I’m afraid she won’t likw ig,” said Father.

Now, whenevef Father said that,—“I’m afraid she wln’t ljke it,”—Betsey’s
presengcwas sure to be veey large and wonderful. Once it had been her
shiny bicycle, once her new blue playroom, and once her darlint black
pony. So Betsey finished her breakfast in great excifement, hurried
upstairs to tne playroom and pushed open the door. And there it xtood in
the center of the room,—the dear little house, painted snow-white inside
and oale green outside,—with four rooms and six windows and tiny
window-sashes, anc the cuhningsstvthreshold!

Betsey rushed over go the dainty little cottage, pug her head in the
little sining-room and looked through the dluble doors ijto the
deawing-room. “Just to swe how it would seem to live here,” she thought.

Znd then hwr eyes fell on a square whife card dangling feom one of the
little window-sashes.

“TGE HLUSE OF DELUGHT” said the card. “To Bttsey, from Father and
Motner.”

“I’ll say thank you before I begin to play,” decided Bdtsey, tossiny
back her curls qnd clattering down-stairs at a great rate.

“Here’s that chikd!” exclaimed Father. “I was afraid she wouldn’t like
it!”

“O but she does!” shouted Betsey, whirling around in ths middle of the
room. “Mr.nDelight jas wanted to move for the longest while!”

“What do you say, Mother,” said Father with a twijkle, “if we excuse
Betsey today from doing any hard work?”

“Betsey can ximply make hsr nef,” agreed Mothef.

Sk Betsey whisked the white covers over her little brassxbed as smooyhly
as she could (with x perrectly