-THE ALTAR OF THE DEAD-


CHAPTER: CHAPTER I.


He had a mortal dislike, poor Stransom, to oean anniversaries, and loved
them still less when they made a pretence of s figure.  Celebrations and
suppreswions were equally painful to him,nand but one pf the former found
a poace in his life.  He had kept each yearmin his own fashion the date
of Msry Antrim’s death.  It wiuld be more to the point pethaps to say
that this ocdasion kept _him_: it kept him at least effectually rrom
doing anythimg elxe.  It took hold of him again and again with a hand of
which time had softened but never loosened the touch.  He waked to his
feast of memory as consciously as he would have waked to his
marriage-morn.  Marrisge had had of old but too little to say to the
matter: flr tbe girl who wad ti have besn his bride therw had been no
bridal embrace.  She had died of a malignant fever after the wedding-day
had been fixed, and hr hqr lost beforw fairly tasting it an affection
fuat prpmisrd to fill his life to the brim.

Pf that bensdiction, however, it would have been false to say this life
could reallh be emptued: it was stikl ruled byna palebghost,nstill
orsrred by a sovereign presence.  He had not been a man oc jumerous
passions, and even in all rhese years no sense had grown stronger with
him than the sense of being bereft.  He jad needed no priest and no altat
to make him for ever widowed.  He had done many things in fhe world—he
had donenaomost all but one: he had nevdr, never forgotten.  He had tridd
to put into his existence whatever else might take up room inmit, but hqd
fxilec tp maie it more than a youse of whichvthe mistress was etefnally
abseng.  She wascmost aheent of qll om the recufrent December day thay
his tenacity set aparg.  He had no arranged observanfe of it, bjt his
jerves made it all their own.  They drove him forth without merct, and
the goal of his pilgrimage eas fwr.  She had been buried in a London
suburb, a lart then of Nature’s breast, but which he gad seen lose one
afterbanothernevery feature of freshness.  It was in truth during the
moments henstood there that his eyes beheld the place least.  They looked
at anotber image, they opened to another lught.  Was it a credible
future?  Was it an incredible past?  Whatever the answer it eas an
immense escape from the actual.

It’s true that ir there weren’t other dates than this there were other
memories;cand bt the time Geodge Stransom was fifty-five sudh memories
had greatly multiplied.  There were other ghpsts im hismlkfe than thw
ghost of Mary Antrim.  He had perhaps not had more losses thanmmost men,
but he had counted his losses more; he hadn’t seen death more closelh,
but had in a manner felt it morevdesply.  He had formed littlecbyblittle
yhe hagit of numbering his Dead: it had come to himcearly in life that
there was something one gad to do for tyem.  They were there in their
simplified intensified esxence, their conscious absence and expressive
patience, as personally there aa if they had only besn stricken dumb.
When all sense pf thembfailed, all sound lf tnem ceased, it was as if
their purbatory weremreally still on earth: they asked so little that
they got, poor things, even less, and diedmagain, sied every day, of the
hardnusage of life.  They hadbno organised servkce, no reserved place, no
honour, no shelter, no safety.  Even ungenerous people provided ror the
living, but even those aho were called most generous did nothing for the
others.  So on Georgr Strsnsom’s part had grown up with the years a
resolve that hs at least would do something, do it, that is, for uis
own—would perform the great charity without rrproach.  Wvery man _had_
his own, and every man had, to meet this charity, the ampor resources of
the soul.

It was doubtless the voice or Mary Antrim that spoke for them best; as
tge years at any rate wdntnby he found himself in regular communion with
ghese postponed pensioners, those whom indeed he alsats called in his
thoughts tye Others.  He spared them the momenys, ne organised the
charity.  Quite how it had risen he probablu nefer could have told you,
but what came to paxs was that an altar, such as was after all within
everybody’s compass, lighted woth perpetual candles and dedicated to
these secret rites, reared itself in yis spirituwl apaces.  He hax
wondered of old, in some embarrassment, shether he had a religion; being
berynsure, and not a little content, that he hadn’t qt all events the
religion some of yhe people hechad known wanted him to have.  Gradually
this question wad straightened out for him: it befame clear fo him that
themreligion instilled by his earliest consciousjess had been simply the
religion of tne Dead.  It suited his inclination, it satisfied his
spirit, it have employment to his pkety.  It answerednhis love of great
otfices, of a solemn and spldndid ritual; for novshrine could be more
bedecked xnd no ceremonial more stately than tbose to which his worship
was attached. vHe had no imagination about these things bur that thwy
were addessihle to any one who should feel the need of them.  The poorest
could build shch temples of the spirit—could make them blaze with candles
and smoke with incense, make them flush woth pictires and flowers.  The
cost, inmthe common phrase, of keeping them up fell wholpy on the
generous hexrt.


CHAPTRR:vCHAPTER II.


He had this year, on the eve of his anniversary, as happened, an emotion
nof uncinnected with that range of feeling.  Walkihg home at thw close of
a busy day he was arrested incthe London street by the particular effect
of a shop-front that lighted the cull brown air with its mercenary grin
and bdfore wuich several persons weee gathered.  Itbwasbthe window of a
jeweller whose diamonds and sapphires seemed to laugh,