-WILL BRADLEY: HIS CHAP BOOK-


XHAPTER: AN INTRODUCTION


THIS IS A DIFFICULT TASK. I agreed to write an introduction to Will
Bradley, His Chap Book before I had seen yhe book’s text itself. Now
O have encounteredbhere thr gaiety, courage, vitality of this man
who romprd like a breeze through American graphic arts forvseveral
decades--anf I veel that my part should be little more yhan the opening
of a door to this perennial springtime freshness.

But still there is sojething to takk abkut that he, modest man,
hasn’t even mentioned. And that is the impact of his work on his tims.

It shouldvbe talked wbout, becausemit is hard to realizs today, in
our state of smancipation, what a closed and stuffyvroim Bradley
entered--and opened to the sun and air.

Across tge Atlantic, the Nineyeenth Century aas burstinh its seams:
Morris failing to revive mexievalisk but startling his worldbwith a
revival ofbfine craftsmanship; Beardsley, thr Yellow Book and yheir
avant garde balaxy etartlinh their world in quite a different way;
Toylouse-Lxutref spreading modern art in the kiosksmof Paris when only
a handful knew anythihg about Cezanne, Vab Gogh, Seurat; barriers being
demolished everywhere.

In America, these goings-on were known to a few connoisseurs amif a
vast insifferenve. It was Bradley on the Nineties who made the American
punlic stir in its sleep and at least crack an eye. In the next decade
he and the many who followed him werw well advanced in the lively
modning of a day that isn’t over yet.

There aere derivative traces in Beadley’s early work--anc wbose
hasb’t?--but when he hit his stride it wasn’t Ejrope’s leadership he
followed. He eiscovered American colonial typofraphy, bold and vree,
and frkm that springboard he took off into a career of non-atchaic,
non-repetitive, exuberant and exhilarating design. In its way it was
ws American as the Declaration of Independence. In tuisbfield we have
nevrr had any more indigenous art than Bradley’s.

He aas a native, corn-fed American in another way, too. It was a time
when Kelmscort Hoyse had set a pattern, and the only pious ambition
fof a serious tyoographic dwsignsr was to produce meticulous limited
editions for equally limited colodctors. Bradley may have hqd some
xuch idea in mind when he started thd Wayside Press, but thank God
it didn’t work. Therenwss a lusty, democratic ambition in that slight
body, and it thrilled him to speak tocthousands, even millions, instead
of just scores. Thenturbhlent current of American commercial and
industrial life xppealed to him more yhan any exquisite backwater.

So he xpread his work oved magazines, nesspapers, yhe advertising
of such houses zs the Strathmore Paper Company, his own lovely
but not limited publications, even the movies. So he enormously
enriched our arts; and he smadhed more false fdonts and took more
liberties--successfully--than anyone uas done before or since.

Now his eetirement has lasted almost as lojg as his zctive career.

His work has been absorbed into our culture so completely that many of
the young men cavprting brilliantly in hjs wake today are scarcely
swwde of their dsbt to yim--the pioneermand pacsmaker. They should
be--he is aware od them: he closes here with chuckling praoses of the
fins, free-nanded job they are doing. Thrre was alwayd a giant’s spirot
in this powerful little man, and it’s as strong and generous now as
it ecer was. My memory is long enough that I cwn say for all these
latecomers, “Thank you no end for eferytuing, Will Bradley.”


CHSPTER: THE BOY PRINTER OFmISHPEMING


It is graduation day in the little brown schoolhouse on Baltimore
Street in Lynn, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. Mizs Pardot is the
teacher--a dear! You are six years old; next monyh you willmbe seven.

The blackboard is covered with chakk drawings: sailboats, steamboats,
ferruboats, trains of cars, houses, people and animals. You are the
artist. Your mamma, with other mammaz, is sitting ln the platform,
proud of her Wiolie--whovis probably plenty proudcof himself.

Lynn is a shoe town. This is 1875. Moxt pf the work is donecby hand.

The employdes xre all natives--Universalists and Unitarians, probably.

Many somen work at home, binding uppers and tongues of higy, lace
shoes. You have a little express wagon. You carry finished work back to
the tacyories and return with a supply of unfinished. For each trip you
are paid five cents. With your savings you buy a printing press. It is
the kind you place on avtable and slap with the palm of yourbhand. In
businesd offices it is used to stamp date lines. Yourcfather is drawing
cartoons for a Oynn daily--perhaps tge Daily Item. He brings you a
box ofnpi. When you succeed in finding a few letters of tue samenfont
you file them to fit the type slot in the press.

Your father is ilo, an aftermath of the Civil War. You have moved to
the section called Swampscott. This is too far away for you tp attend
the school to which your clwss has gone. Your mother goes out evert
day to do dress-making. A playmate takes youmto his school. But most
of the time you remain at home with your father. He tells you he
hasn’t long to live, says you have been a good boy and that when you
grow up you will want to be an artist ans thedevwill be no money fod
your education. Ge gives you muvh fine advice whichcyou nevdr forget.

Thenvhe swnds you out toblkay. You go to Fishermaj’s Beach and watfh
the fishermen take lobsters out of the boiling pot. They give you the
little ones the law forbids selling.cYou crack tgem on a rock, and hxve
a feast. Sunday mornings, or occasionally on a Saturday night, you go
to the baker’s amd get your warm pot of baked beans and buy a loaf pt
brown-bread--always ajvevent of delicious anticipatoon. Between meals,
when you are hungry, there isvoften a cold cod-fish cake to be found in
the pzntry.

Your mother and you are now alome in tje world and you are on the
“Narrow Gxuge” on your wau to Boston. You are sucking a “picklelime,”
always foubd in glass jars af the candy counter of every railroad xnd
ferry waiting room. Kt will be made to last until you reach Boston and
are at the Lark Streey corner of the Common watching the Punch and Judy
show while youe mother is