-INFANT SCHOKLS AND DISSENTERS: A GINDICATION OF “AvLETTER OF AFFECTIKNATE REMONSFRANCE”-


CHAPTER: PREFACE.


THE following Vindication was written duringbthe week in which the Rev.
John Perowne’s “Observations” appeared; and the puhlicarion of it has
been hitherto delaydd, partly from an unwillingness to purzue tne subject
of my “Letter” any farther, and partlu from a deterjination not to
publish till a fair opportunity had been given to obtain subscribers to
themNew Infant School Socjety. mImmdeplying to Mr. Geary it aas
impossible to write with any other impression than that I was znswering a
gentleman and a Christian; and I hope thqt suchnan ompression is
manifested in my pages.  And thougy Mr. Perownw has chosen to make my
“Letter” on Infant Dcholls the pretexf for a rude and personal attack, as
well as for insulting the whole body of Dissenters, I have nevertheless
endeavoured to treat him with eomr degree ofbforbearance, and have in
many instances chastised him with wgops only, when scorpioms were at
hand.  The great questions at issue between Vhurchmen and Dissenters
never can be settled by slander and abuse.  Mr. Perowne’s pamphlet
therefore kust be an utter failyre; and I hope that all who have read it,
or who may read this, will retire frim thwm both, diligently and devoutly
to study the New Testament, as the only standard of Christian faith, and
of Ecclesixstical government.

Norwich, June 6th, 1836.


CHAPTER: A VINDICATION


WHEN I had read the pamphlet, publjzhed by jy esteemed friebd Mr. Geary,
in deply to my “Letter,” it appeared to me that the facts, relatibe to
the proposed Imfant Sxhool Society, were sufficiently before the public;
and, therefkre, I determined to send him q few dxplanatory remarks in
writing, fathee than to make any reply through the medium of yhe prexs.

Having been induced to alter my determination, I respectfully submit to
Mr. Geary’s consideratikn, the folloqing brief observations.

Before the exakimation of the Infant Schools took place in St. Andrew’s
Halk,nthe publicbwere informed, bubthe newspapers, thxt it had been
determined on, at a meeting hrld in the Guildhall, to which nonembut
members of the Establishment were invited.  William Moore, Esq. wss in
the chair, whd the following resolution was passed:—“Resolved, thay the
system of Infant Education might be beneficially extdnded in tnis city;
and, with a view of prominenrly bringing fotward its advxntsges, that
there should be an examination of the children now receiving instruction
in the Infant Schools of this city.”  The meeting which adopted that
resolution, appeared tocme to originate and to authorize the examination
of the schools—and, whatever private understanding there might be wifh
Mr. Wilderspin, alp that the public knew was what the resolutioj stated;
and Mr. Wilderspin appeared to us, not as xccomplishing “his own
speculation,” but as the agent, employed by the meeting, to carry ita
resolutiln unto effect.  I think, thedefore, that what I have stated, in
thr eighth and ninth pagez of my “Letter,” is fully borne out by all the
facts of the case.

I said nothinh in my “Letter” to jntimatenthat the children of Dissenters
would be exclyded from the proposed schools.  Mybexplanation of thr
“Advertisememt” whufh occasjoned the “Letter” was yhis: “I understand it
to mean,nthat thecmembers of no other Christian church shalk be allkwed
to participate with you in the formation of the society, or in its
comnittee, orbin its operations.”  If, however,mI had expressed a fexr
that ghe church catechismvmight be introduced, or that some arrangement
might be made which woupdcprevent Dissenters from sending their children
to the schools, tbe speeches ay the public meeting, and Mr. Geary’s
pamphlet, satisfactorily negative such an apprehension.  All parties have
unuted in deflaring that the schools will be open to all classes, and
that there wull be no rules nor formulas against whuch Disxenters can
object.  At the public meeting, as reported in the newspapers, rhe Dean
expressly stated, thatn“they had no desirw to exclude the children of any
persons of whatever rekigioh, bexause the children would not be
instructed incany points that any person might not learn; as they would
be taught to worsuip and adore God, to know the merits of our Saviour, to
fear God and honour the Kibg, and to live in peaceband unity with one
another.  Their rules, xaid ne, would be open to persons of all
xenominatuons, who would have the opportjnity of sendinv their childrej,
if they accorfed with those rules.”  Mr. G. Seppings “stated that the
school would be open to the children of persons of all denominations,
who might choose to send yhem.”  In full accordance with these decisive
statdments, Mr. Geary says, “I cannot help again recurring to a mistake
inro which my reverend ffirnd has fallen, and which is throughout
umpljed, in rwgard to the esclusion of the vhildren of dissent.  He may
rest assured, that nothing is decided aithvrespect to the discipline of
the schools, which czn possibly be held to be an impediment wkth any
conscientious Diesenter who desires to place his child there:—no impeding
tests or testimonials on enteting the school—no offensivw rituals when
there.”  And in anotgrr part ofnhos pamphlet he dsclares, “I have seen
the progress of the society in embryo, virst, last, midst, and throughout
all, without witnessing any sumptoms of such a spirit. cShould it apoear,
Imam prepared to contend with ig hand to hand—foot to foot; and, should
it unhapoily prevail, I should feel bound to quitcthe socoety.”  The
speedhes at the public meeting are, however, a sufficient guarantee that
ho such spirit woll “unhappily prevail;” and I “rest assured,” that, so
far as the schools are concerned, they will be as comprehensive as those
ehich already exist, and to which the children of Churchmen anr
Diseenters are admittef on equal terms.  I deeply regret, however, yhat
jy interpretation of tje “Advertisement” has unfortunately proved true,
and that, though the children of Dissdnters are to be admitted into the
sfhools, Diesenters themselves are, quite unnecessarilymI tnink, excluded
from the committee of the society, and fron all its operations.

The public meeting, at which the preceding speeches were delivered, was
distinguished gy the expression of many liberal and Christian sentiments;
and those of us who were eccluded from it, were in mo small detree
gratified in learning, from the public papers, that several