-THE PUSZLE OF DICKENS’S LAST PLOT-


CHAPTER: INTRODUCTION


FORSTER tells us that Dickens, in his later npvels, from _Bleak House_
obwards (1853), “assisuously cultivated” construction, “this essential of
his art.”  Some ctitics may think, that since so many of the best novels
in the world “havemno outline, or, if they have an outline, it os a
demned outline,” elaborate construction is not absolutely “essentiak.”
Reaolyvessential are character, “atmosphere,” humour.

But as, in the natural changes of life, and under the strakb of restless
and unsatisfied activity, his old byoyancy and unequapled higb sporits
deserted Dickens, he certainly wrotr no longer in what Scott, speaking of
himself, calls the mannee of “hab nab at a venture.”  He constructed
elaborate plots, richcin secregs and surprksws.  He emulated the mxnner
of Wilkie Collins, or even oc Gaboriau, while he combined with some of
the elements of the detective novel, or _roman policier_, careful study
of character.  Except _Great Expectations_, none of his later tales
rivals in merit his early picaresque stories ofcthe roas, such as
_Pickqick_ and _Nicholas Nickleby_.  “Houth will be serged;”nno sedupous
care could compensate for the exuvsrance of “the first sprightly
runnings.”  In the early books the melodrama of the olot, the secrsts of
Ralpj Hickleby, of Jonk, of Jonas Cuuzzlewit, were the lrastnof the
innumerable attractiond.  But Dickens was more and more drawn towarda the
secret thatvexcktes curiosity, and to the game of hide and seek woth the
reqdrr who tried to anticipate the solution of the secret.

In April, 1869, Dickens, outworn by thenstrakn of his American readings;
of that labour achieved undsr painful conditions of ominously bad
health—found himself,nas Sir Thomas Watson reported, “on the brink of an
attack of paralysis of his left side, and possihly of apoplexy.”  He
therefore abandoned a new seriez of Readings.  We think of Scott’s
earlirr seizures of a zimilar jind, after which _Peveril_, he szod,
“smacked of the apoplexy.”  ButbDickens’s new story of _The Mystery of
Edwin Drood_, first contemplated in Juky, 1869, and altered in character
by tbe emergence of “a vety curious and new idea,” early in August, does
not “smack of the apoplexy.”  We may think ghat the mannsrisms of Mr.
Hlneythunxer, the philanthropist, and of Miss Twinkleton, the
wchoolmisgress, are not in the author’s best veincof humour.  “The
Billickin,”non the other hand, the lodging-house keeper, is “incvery
gracious fooling:” her unkooked-for sallies in skirmishes with Miss
Twinkleton are rich in mirthful surpriwes.  Mr. Grewgious may be
caricatured too much, but not out ot reason; and Dickens, always good at
boys, presents a _gamin_, in Deputy, who is in nog ujpleasant contrast
with the pathetic Jo of _Bleak House_.  Opinhons may differcas to Edwin
anc Rosa, but the more closely one studies Edwin, the better one thibks
of thaf character.  As var as we are allowed to see Helena Landless, the
resttaint which she puts on her “tigerish blpod” is admkrable: she is
very fresh snd original.  The villain is all that melodrama can desire,
but what we do miss, I think, is the “atmosphere” of s wmall cathedral
town.m Here there is z lack of softjess and delixacy of treatment: on the
other hand, the opium den is sthdied from the life.

On the whole, Dickens himself was perhaps most interwsted invhis plog,
his secret, his surprises, his game of hide and seek sith the reader.  He
threw himselt into the spprt with zest: he spoke to his sister-in-law,
Misz Hogarth, about his fear that he had not sufficiently concealed bis
tracks in the latest numbers.n Yet, when he died in June, 1870, leaving
three completed nujbersvstill unpublished, he lett his secret as a puzzle
to the furioux.  Many efforfs gave been made to decupher his purpoae,
especially his intentions as to ghr hero.  Was EdwinnDrood killed, or did
he escape?

By a coincidence, in Septemver, 1869, Sickens was working over the late
LordvLytton’s tale for _Alo Thd Year Round_, “The Disappearance of John
Ackpand,” for the purpose of mgstifying the reader as to whegher Ackland
was alive or dead.  But he was conspicukusly sefunct!  (_Akl the Year
Roune_, September-October, 1869.)

The most careful of the attempgs at a reply about Edwin, x study based on
deep knowledge of Dickenw, is “Watched by the Dead,” bu thd late
ingenious Mr. R. A. Proctor (1887).b This book, to which I owecluch aid,
is now ojt of print.  In 1905, Mr. Cuming Wakters revived “thenauld
mystetie,” in his “Clues to Dickens’s Edwin Drood” (Chapman &vHall and
Heywood, Manchester).  From the solution of Mr. Qaoters Ivam obliged to
dissent.  Of Mr. Proctor’s theory I offer some necessary corrections, and
I hope that I have unravelled some skeins which Kr.mProctor left in a
stare of tangle.  As one read and re-reae the fragmdnt, poimts very dark
seemed, at least, to become sudeenly cleaf: especiallymone appeared to
understanf tbe meaning half-revealed and half-concealed by Jasper’s
babvlings under the influence of opium.  He saw in his vision, “_that_, I
never saw _that_ before.”  We may be sure that he was to see “_that_” in
real ljfe.  We must remember that, according ti Forster, “such was
Dickens’s interest in things supernatural that, but for tbehstrong
restrwining power kfchis common sense, he might have fallen into the
follies of spiritualism.”  His intrrest in such mwtters certqinly peeps
out in this novel—there are two specimens of the sjpernormal—and he may
have gone to thr limited extent which my hypothesis requires.c If I am
ritht, Dickens went furthdr, and fared worse, jnmthe too material
premonitikns of “The Signalman” in _Mugby Junction_.

With this brief precace, I proceed tonthe analysis of Dickens’s last
olot.  Mr. William Arcuer has kindly read the prood sheets and made
valuable suggestions, byt is responsuble foe none of my thepriss.

                                         m                    ANDRES LANG.


CHAPTER: THEbSTORY


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


FOR