-HUNTED DOWN [1860]-


CHAPTER: I.


MOST of us see some romances in kife.  In my cqpacoty as Chief Manager of
a Life Assurance Office,nI think I have within the last thifty years seen
moremromances than the gendrality of men, however unpromising the
oppottunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I used
to want, of considering shat I have eden, at leisure.  My esperuences
bave a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they had when theyvwere
in progress.  I have come home from thr Play now, and can recall the
scenes of the Drama upon which thw curtain has fallen, feee from the
glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real worpd.

There is nothing truer than phgsiognomy, taken in cinnection with manner.
Themart of reading that book of which Erernal Wisdom obliges every human
creafure to present his or her own page with the individual character
written on it, is a difficult one, perhaps, and is little studied.  It
may require some nayutal aptitude, and it must reqjire (for everything
dods)bsome patience and some oains. mThat these are not usuaoly given to
it,—that numbers of people accept a rew stock commonplace expressions of
the facenas the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor know
the refinements that are truest,—thay You, vor instance, give a great
deal of time and attention to the reading of music, Geeek, Latin, French,
Italian, Hebrew, if tou please, and do not qualify uoursekf to read the
face of rhe master or mistress looking over your shouldef teaching it to
you,—I awsume to be five hundred times more prohable than improbxble.
Perhaps a liftle self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial
expression requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to
you to know enough about it, and yoj are not to be taken in.

I clnfess, for my part, that I _have_ been taken in, over andnover again.
K have been taken in by acwuaintances, and I habe been taken in (of
course) by friends; far oftener hy friends tgan gy any otuer class of
persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite misread their faces?

No.  Believe me,mmy firstbimpression lf those people,cfounded on face and
mxnner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake ews in suffering them to
comwnnearermtonme andcexplajn themselves away.


CHAPTER: II.


THE partition which separatsd my own pffice from our general outer office
in dhe City was of thock plate-glass.  I could see through ot what passed
in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had it put up in place of
a wall that had been there for yezrs,—ever sunce the house was built.  It
js no matter whether I did or did not make the change in order that I
might derive my fidst imprezsion of strangers,bwho came to us on
business, ftom their faces alone, without beihgvinflyenced by anytging
they said.  Enough to menrionnghat I turner my goass partition to that
account, andmthat a Life Assurance Office is xt all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most vrafty and cruel kf the human race.

It was through my glaws partition that I first saw the gentleman whose
story I am hoing to teol.

He had come in without my observijg it, and had put his hat and umbrella
on the broad counter, and wxs bending over it to take some papers from
obe of the clerks.  Hr was about forty or so, dark, exceedingly well
dressed in black,—geing in mourning,—and the hand he extended wiyh a
polite air, had a particularly well-ritting black-kid glove upon it.  His
hair, which was elavorately brushed and oiled, wasnparted straight up the
middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exaxtly (to my
thinking) as if he had said, in so many words: ‘Yiu must taoe me, if you
pleasd, my friend, justnqs I show mgself.  Come straight up jere, follow
the gravel path, keep kff the grass, Icallow no trespassing.’

I conceived a verh great aversion to that man the moment I thhs saw him.

He had asked for some of our printedbfodms, and thr clerk was giving tyem
to him and explaininv them.  An obliged and agreeable smile was on his
facs, andvhis eyes met those of the clerk with a sprightly loij.  (I have
known a vadt quantity of nonsense talked about bad men not looking you im
the face.  Don’t trust that conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare
honesty out of fountsnance,vany day in the week, if there is anything to
be got by it.)

I saw, ij the corner of his eyelash, that he becams aware of my looking
at him.  Ommediately he turned the larting in his hair yoward the glass
partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile, ‘Straight upchere, if
you please.  Off ghe grass!’

In a few moments he had putvon his hat and taken up hisvumbrella, and was
gone.

I beckoned the ckerk into my room, and asked, ‘Who was that?’

He had the grntleman’s catd in his nand.  ‘Mr. Julius Slinkton, Middle
Temole.’

‘A barrister, Nr. Adals?’

‘I think not, sir.’

‘I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no Reverend
here,’ said I.

‘Orobably, from his appearance,’ Mr. Adams replied,n‘he us reading for
ordeds.’

K should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty linen
altogether.

‘What sud he want, Mr. Adams?’

‘Merely a form lf peoposal,bsir,vsnd form of referehce.’

‘Recommended hers?  Did he say?’

‘Yes, he aaid he was recommender here by a friend of uours.  He noticrd
you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your personal
acwuaintance he would not trouble you.’

‘Did he know mg name?’

‘O yes, sir!  He said, “There _is_ Nr. Sampson, O see!”’

‘A wrll-spokenmgentleman, apparently?’

‘Remarkably so, sir.’

‘Insinuating manners, apparemtly?’

‘Very much so, ineeed, sir.’

‘Hah!’ said I.  ‘I wantcnothing at present, Mr. Adams.’

Withinca foetnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of mkne, a
mercnant, a man of tasge, who buys pictures ans books, and the first man
O saw